Overall, the Bank judges that the risks to the inflation outlook in Canada are roughly balanced over the projection horizon.
Overall, the prices of non-energy commodities have changed little since mid-2005.
This percentage of respondents was almost the same as in the previous three surveys.
What is crucial to the analysis of trend inflation is the extent to which monetary expansion accommodates or encourages a pace of aggregate demand that puts persistent pressure on aggregate supply.
This being said, significant upside and downside risks to the Bank's projection for inflation remain.
The base-case projection incorporates a number of key assumptions.
The Bank has attempted to quantify the uncertainties surrounding the inflation projection by using fan charts.
The underlying dynamics of the economic outlook remain largely unchanged.
Prices for energy commodities have been mixed in recent months.
In the major European countries, the situation has been mixed.
This effect should disappear by the end of the first quarter of 2003.
With its conditional commitment introduced in April 2009, the Bank also provided exceptional guidance on the likely path of its target rate.
The evolution of risks since January is summarized in Table 4.
Based on the past dispersion of private sector forecasts, US economic growth in 2014 would be expected to fall within ± 0.5 percentage points of the Bank's projection, with a somewhat wider range in 2015.
This continued through the third quarter.
The central tendency is about 1 3/4 per cent.
With this Report, the content and format of the Risks section have been revised.
The evolution of risks since October is summarized in Table 4.
The Bank of Canada left the target for the overnight rate unchanged at 4.25 per cent on 6 September and 17 October.
These estimates are reviewed as new data come in.
In any event, the differential between nominal and real rates remains generally in line with the Bank's objective of low inflation.
A complement to this range is shown in Chart 26 and Chart 27.
The Bank's base-case projection incorporates the following key assumptions: a Canada/US exchange rate averaging 103 cents US; energy prices in line with recent futures prices; persistently strong prices for non-energy commodities; and supportive global credit conditions.
At the end of April, one of the major risks identified in the last Monetary Policy Report was materializing.
The Bank's preferred measure of broad money, or holdings of liquid assets, is M2++.
This range is intended to measure ex ante forecast uncertainty.
The relevant thresholds differ across firms.
There are a few note-worthy adjustments, however.
Chart 29 and Chart 30 depict the 50В per cent and 90В per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the first quarter of 2011 to the end of 2012.
Housing market activity varies across provinces.
While this range for the output gap reflects the significant uncertainty surrounding any point estimate, the Bank is building the base-case economic projection using the midpoint of the range (i.e., 1.5 per cent).
The implications of recent global economic developments for the Canadian economy are mixed.
M2++ is an alternative measure that incorporates all mutual funds.
Recent staff analysis using highly disaggregated export data has shed additional light on these issues.
The domestic picture remains mixed, however.
The Bank's base-case projection incorporates the following key assumptions: a Canada/US exchange rate averaging 96 cents US; energy prices in line with recent futures prices; and prices for non-energy commodities increasing progressively as the global economy recovers.
These projections for growth in 2002 and 2003 are broadly in line with the latest private sector forecasts.
Moreover, they are subject to frequent review as the flow of economic information is received.
The situation for the manufacturing sector is somewhat different.
Medium - and longer-term rates, on the other hand, have remained relatively stable.
The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap was roughly unchanged at -4 per cent.
Inflation has remained essentially unchanged since the last Report.
Further information on a range of indicators used by the Bank to monitor credit conditions is presented on the new credit conditions web page at.
The effects of international developments are also evident in the labour market and in the recent measures of consumer confidence.
A comprehensive solution to the sovereign debt and financial stability issues in a number of countries will be required.
The section concludes with a discussion of the risks to the base-case projection.
The evolution of the risks since April is summarized in Table 5.
As of March 1995, core inflation was running at an annual rate of 2.1 per cent.
Chart 33 and Chart 34 depict the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the third quarter of 2013 to the end of 2015.
(The average settlements in the second half of the year were similar to those in the first half.)
By convention, the Canadian dollar is assumed to remain at its recent level of 91 cents US over the projection horizon.
Thus, continued close monitoring of the economic situation will be needed in order to judge the appropriate level of monetary conditions.
The monetary conditions index constructed by the Bank combines both variables to provide a shorthand measure of the overall degree of tightening or easing of policy.
This view is essentially unchanged from that of the January Update.
Over the medium term, there are both upside and downside risks to the price of oil.
The clearest example of the exchange rate effect can be seen in motor vehicles.
Indicators of capacity pressures are mixed.
No such large movements have been observed recently.
The June Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation for 2016 is unchanged from April, at 2.1 per cent.
But what matters for monetary policy is the economy as a whole.
As always, the Bank monitors a wide range of measures to assess underlying inflation.
Relative to the April Report, the outlook for growth and inflation in Canada is little changed.
The outlook for economic growth for the second half of 2017 is roughly unchanged from July.
Finally, an orderly adjustment of global imbalances is assumed.
The global economy has unfolded broadly as the Bank projected in July.
Other base metal prices are broadly unchanged on aggregate.
In making its judgment about this desired path, the Bank uses information from many sources on developments that will influence the trend of inflation.
As well, NAFTA covers most services.
When determining the appropriate path for policy interest rates, it is important to assess the degree to which such financial "headwinds" bear upon economic activity.
Oil prices are subject to both upside and downside risks.
The Bank's outlook for the Canadian economy is little changed relative to the October Report.
The key risks to the base-case projection are outlined at the end of this section.
This outlook is broadly unchanged from the January Report.
This is in line with the latest Consensus Economics outlook.
Recent private sector forecasts are broadly consistent with this scenario.
Guidance on this path is provided in the accompanying press release.
A discussion of the risks to the base-case projection concludes the section.
However, it remains difficult to analyze Canada's international trade volumes in terms of the underlying fundamentals.
The April Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation in 2010 is 1.9 per cent.
In aggregate, non-energy commodity prices have stayed relatively flat since July.
Important historical revisions were recently made to US national accounts data.
The risks listed below include several that are similar to those identified in January.
Historical data for real GDP are frequently revised.
The range of core measures was 1.5 to 1.8 per cent in September.
Historical experience suggests that there is a wide band of uncertainty around any forecast of energy prices, and that the risks around it need not be symmetrically distributed.
These assumptions are close to current market expectations.
An important factor in the foreign exchange market during the past six months has been the strength of the US dollar.
In the regular survey reported in the Conference Board's December Index of Business Confidence, 78 per cent of respondents continued to expect inflation to be 2 per cent or less over the near term.
This range is intended to convey a sense of forecast uncertainty.
Agriculture prices are little changed.
The Bank will have to monitor developments in this area closely.
In the regular survey reported in the winter issue of the Conference Board of Canada's Index of Business Confidence, 74 per cent of respondents expected prices, in general, to rise over the next six months at a rate of 2 per cent or less, virtually unchanged from last autumn.
Beginning in December, the Bank is adopting a new system of pre-set dates for implementing Bank Rate changes.
As part of the shift to the harmonized sales tax , most taxes currently paid on business inputs will be refunded through tax credits.
The index is currently at a level similar to that of last November.
The composition of GDP growth is anticipated to remain relatively balanced.
There are both upside and downside risks to this outlook.
Over time, the Bank will update its judgment as appropriate with additional data.
Two of the risks in the April Report have been modified.
By convention, the Bank assumes that oil prices will remain near their recent levels.
Crude oil prices, which were US$58 per barrel at the time of the July Update, averaged US$63 per barrel in the 10 days ending on 14 October 2005.
The pass-through can be inferred by examining the evolution of inflation for goods with high import content.
As reported in the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey, 91 per cent of firms expect average inflation over the next two years to remain within the 1 to 3 per cent control range.
It should remain there over the rest of next year.
This resulted from the fact that hourly labour compensation in the business sector was little changed between the fourth quarter of 2002 and the fourth quarter of 2003.
These estimates include a revision to the timing of automatic spending cuts (known as "sequestration").
In August, it rose to 2.5 per cent.
This view of the current size of the output gap is similar to that held in the January Update.
Chart 35 and Chart 36 depict the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the second quarter of 2012 to the end of 2014.
Market-based measures of longer - term inflation expectations continue to lie within their historical range.
The June Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation was 1.8 per cent for 2014 and 2.0 per cent for 2015.
Second, energy prices evolve in line with current futures prices.
The Bank's Senior Loan Officer Survey reports that business-lending conditions were broadly unchanged during the second quarter of 2015, with both price and non-price conditions basically the same as in the first quarter.
The Bank's projection for the growth of potential output in Canada over the 2011-13 period is little changed from the projection in the October 2010 Report.
In the fourth quarter, real GDP is estimated to have grown by about 2 1/2 per cent.
The Bank is engaged in research to provide a more precise measure within this band.
Prospects for inflation are little changed.
Other statistical measures of the trend rate of inflation continued to bracket the core rate.
The Bank's monetary conditions index is largely unchanged from last April.
Underlying the base-case projection are a number of key assumptions.
Several factors account for this change in outlook.
The Canadian-dollar effective exchange rate index has moved in a similar fashion.
Nonetheless, the broad profile for inflation in Canada is little changed, with the Bank projecting both total and core inflation to return gradually to 2 per cent over the latter part of the projection horizon as slack in the economy is slowly absorbed and inflation expectations remain well anchored.
There are both upside and downside risks to the Bank's base-case outlook for inflation.
Overall, the Bank judges that these risks are roughly balanced over the projection horizon.
Both total CPI and core inflation are projected to remain near 2 per cent throughout the projection period.
Since then, the MCI has varied between -4.5 and -5.5.
The Bank continues to monitor closely the impact of global and technological factors on inflation.
The Bank judges that these risks are roughly balanced.
This profile is roughly unchanged from the October Report.
The Canadian economy continues to undergo complex adjustments that are expected to play out over the next few years.
There are both upside and downside risks to oil prices.
The outlook for core inflation is broadly unchanged from the October Report.
Overall, the Bank judges that the risks relative to its projection for inflation are roughly balanced.
More recent projections for 1998 average 1.3 per cent.
By convention, the Canadian dollar is assumed to remain at its recent level of 93 cents over the projection horizon.
By convention, the Canadian dollar is assumed to be close to its recent average of 77 cents, similar to the assumption of 76 cents in April.
Typically, gasoline prices move broadly in sync with oil prices.
Key medium - and longer-term measures of inflation expectations continue to be close to 2 per cent.
The outlook for growth in Canada is about the same as in July, with the impacts of various global developments largely offsetting one another.
Since February, spreads have remained relatively stable.
This is reflected in both official and private sector forecasts.
The underlying dynamics of the US economy remain largely as outlined in the October projection.
Growth in 2013 is expected to equal that of potential output, at 2.1 per cent.
By early August, production had returned to normal.
Taking into account all of the risks bearing on the outlook, the Bank views the projection to be balanced.
A complementary perspective is provided using statistical analysis of the Bank's forecast errors, which suggests that a 50 per cent confidence interval around the base-case projection widens from ±0.3 percentage points in the second quarter of 2018 to ±0.6 percentage points by the end of 2020.
The risks around the projection for the US and global economies, as well as for inflation in Canada, appear to be balanced.
For the immediate future there seem to be two possibilities.
In this Report, the Bank has revisited its assumptions for both trend labour productivity and trend labour input, and has concluded that the profile assumed in April remains appropriate.
The projection includes recently legislated tax reforms.
Based on the past dispersion of private sector forecasts, a reasonable range around the base-case projection for CPI inflation is ±0.3 percentage points.
The forecast for total CPI inflation for 2016 is 2.1 per cent.
Overall, the Bank judges the risks to the inflation outlook in Canada are roughly balanced over the projection horizon.
The Bank's non-energy commodity price index is broadly unchanged relative to that in October.
This partly reflects the usual lags between changes in import prices and changes in consumer prices.
Inflation in Canada has been broadly in line with the Bank's April projection.
The July Consensus Economics forecasts for total CPI inflation in 2012 and 2013 were 1.9 per cent and 2.0 per cent, respectively.
Based on the latest futures curve, West Texas Intermediate oil prices are projected to remain in the US$103 to $109 range.
These spreads are assumed to be back to longer-term historical averages by early 2011.
The Report examines this issue in the context of the outlook for inflation.
Charts a and B in technical Box 2 show the uncertainty around the projection for core and total CPI inflation.
Several other indicators are consistent with this assessment.
Broad money has been an indicator of short-term movements in output and the core CPI.
This is very close to the 99 cents US level assumed in the October Report.
Inventory levels also appear to be in good balance.
Chart 23 and Chart 24 depict the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the third quarter of 2010 to the end of 2012.
An important example is recent developments in the auto industry.
Economic activity in Canada is unfolding largely as expected, led by government and consumer spending.
Another indicator of the trend of inflation is the very broad aggregate M2++.
Fluctuations are found mainly in exports, housing and investment.
However, it remains crucial that countries implement the agreed policies.
These assumptions will be updated as new information becomes available.
A key risk revolves around the very divergent economic performances of the major industrial countries.
Global oil price benchmarks have been fluctuating near levels assumed in the July Report.
For most of the period since the last Report, the Canada/US exchange rate has tended to fluctuate in a range of 66 to 68 US cents.
Chart 18 and Chart 19 show the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the third quarter of 2014 to the end of 2016.
The BCPI is anticipated to remain relatively stable.
The outlook for growth is broadly similar to that expected in the July Report.
The Bank left its key policy interest rate unchanged at 4.25 per cent on 6 March and 24 April.
These fan charts are derived using statistical analysis of ex post errors from the Bank's projection models.
In this base-case projection, there is no change in the policy interest rate.
Against this backdrop, the outlook for the Canadian economy through to the end of 2006 is essentially unchanged from that in the January Monetary Policy Report Update.
Other measures of the trend rate of inflation that the Bank monitors also stayed above 2 per cent in July and August.
Looking ahead, the Bank of Canada's non-energy commodity price index should remain stable over the projection horizon.
Over the past several years, Canadian homeowners have been saving on their payments when renewing their fixed-rate mortgages.
Finally, the base case is predicated upon a gradual and orderly resolution of global imbalances.
Chart 36 and Chart 37 depict the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the third quarter of 2012 to the end of 2014.
However, the size and timing of these effects are highly uncertain.
Responses to a quarterly question on long-term inflation expectations show an average of 1.9 per cent through 2028.
Overall, the risks to the base-case projection for inflation appear balanced.
The Canadian dollar has averaged 103 cents US since the May fixed announcement date, in line with the level assumed in the April Report.
Inflation expectations have remained well anchored.
On balance, these developments should have little net further effect on core inflation.
First, longer-term inflation expectations are still very close to 2 per cent - about the same as the current level of core inflation.
Since then, the Bank Rate has been left unchanged, and the monetary conditions index has varied between -5 and -6.
The fluctuations in the MCI have resulted largely from changes in the exchange rate.
Canadian economic activity in the first half of the year has evolved broadly as anticipated.
The anticipated rotation of demand toward non-energy exports is well under way.
Total CPI inflation averaged 2.3 per cent in January and February, unchanged from its average rate in the fourth quarter of 2010.
By their nature, these consequences are difficult to estimate.
The ECB also stated that it will implement targeted credit measures.
A quarterly question on long-term inflation expectations shows an average of 2 per cent through 2027.
This projection is consistent with medium - and long-term inflation expectations remaining well anchored.
Inflation in Canada has remained close to the 2 per cent target in recent quarters.
These short-term risks appear to be balanced.
On balance, the monetary conditions index has stayed within its recent range, but with a change in the mix of interest rates and the exchange rate.
Thus, we would expect core inflation to remain in the lower half of the inflation-control target range for the balance of 1997.
The Bank estimates that the degree of excess capacity in the economy remained largely unchanged during the first half of 2014.
If the effect of changes in indirect taxes is excluded, the rate of increase in the total CPI in the first quarter was 2.4 per cent, unchanged from the preceding quarter.
This was the rate projected for the third quarter in the July Update.
The core rate of inflation, an indicator of the underlying trend, averaged 1.6 per cent over the same period.
These developments can potentially affect the Canadian economy through a number of channels.
The main risks to this outlook relate to demand, supply, and inflation expectations.
In peripheral European countries, the necessary fiscal adjustment has just begun.
These effects are expected to persist in 2011.
These policy decisions had been broadly anticipated by financial markets.
Recent events have been broadly in line with this profile.
The size and timing of the effects, however, will depend on the details of the measures.
The inventory adjustment, which began earlier this year, is largely complete.
Medium-term inflation expectations remain well anchored.
The Bank is continuing to monitor NAFTA renegotiations.
Inflation expectations remain well anchored.
Annual wage settlements in the unionized private sector averaged 1.8 per cent, the same as in the first half of the year.
The Bank's base-case projection incorporates the following key assumptions: a Canada/US exchange rate averaging 96 cents US; energy prices in line with recent futures prices; prices for non-energy commodities increasing progressively as the global economy recovers; and global credit conditions continuing to gradually improve.
The outlook, however, is subject to considerable uncertainty, given the unknowns around policy actions by the incoming US administration, particularly concerning trade.
Policy rates in both Canada and the United States have remained unchanged since the middle of 2006.
This forecast for exports is similar to that in the October base-case projection, which already incorporated judgment based on a preliminary version of the revised framework.
In Canada, market expectations derived from short-term interest rates imply no change in the policy rate in 2007.
Expectations of inflation are influenced both by recent developments in inflation and by the credibility of the Bank's inflation-control strategy.
Reflecting all of these factors, on 19 July, the Bank maintained the target for the overnight rate at 1 per cent.
The main risks to the outlook for inflation are those identified in the October Monetary Policy Report.
The uncertainty around the Bank's inflation projection is illustrated using fan charts.
Indicators of capacity pressures in Canada have been mixed.
This has been partly due to borrowing against home equity.
The Canadian dollar has averaged close to 101 cents US since the March fixed announcement date and is assumed to remain at this level over the projection horizon, compared with the 98 cents US assumed in the January Report.
The output gap is expected to close around mid-2018, similar to the October projection.
Other developments have acted to offset some of these influences on core inflation.
By the fourth quarter of 2017, the GDP growth outlook is broadly unchanged from that in January.
The European Central Bank has announced a series of measures, including two long-term refinancing operations and the reactivation of its covered-bond purchase program.
Demand for Canadian dollar assets has been evident in the exchange market as well as in the bond market.
Setting aside these transitory effects, the Bank judges that the underlying trend in inflation is about 1.5 to 1.7 per cent.
The Board's latest compensation survey also points to little change in aggregate wage increases this year.
As with previous changes in indirect taxes, for the purposes of monetary policy, the Bank is looking through the first-round effect on prices.
This initial assumption will be revised once concrete policy measures are announced and enacted by the incoming US administration.
It also examines measures of inflation expectations and the pace of monetary expansion.
The global and Canadian economic outlooks remain subject to both upside and downside risks and to uncertainties.
The underlying macroeconomic risks are roughly balanced.
Together with core inflation, total CPI inflation is expected to return gradually to target around mid-2015.
Given the weight of imported goods in the average consumer basket in Canada, exchange rate movements typically feed through to the CPI by a factor of about one-fifth.
It is also being driven by the continuing integration into the world economy of major emerging-market economies such as China and India.
The October Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation for 2016 is 2.0 per cent, essentially unchanged from 2.1 per cent in July.
The Bank Rate is correspondingly 1 1/4 per cent and the deposit rate is 3/4 per cent.
The projection horizon has now been extended to 2015, when the growth of potential output is expected to be 2.1 per cent.
Typical forecasts of longer-term inflation remain between 1.8 and 2.1 per cent, depending on the time horizon.
Despite this development, the Canadian dollar continued to trade in a narrow range.
Both total CPI and core inflation are expected to remain near 2 per cent throughout the projection period.
There are both upside and downside risks to the Bank's oil price assumptions.
The uncertainty surrounding the Bank's inflation projection is illustrated using fan charts.
The June Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation is 1.6 per cent in 2016 and 2.1 per cent in 2017.
Systems for banking, securities, and payments have been tested extensively for compliance.
The challenge will be to assess carefully, using all available coincident and leading indicators, when adjustments are needed.
The outlook for oil is subject to considerable two-sided risks.
Historically, the average price of commodities exported by Canada has tended to fluctuate in line with the world business cycle.
Since the May Report, the Canadian dollar has fluctuated between US$0.6324 and US$0.6636.
The levels of two other statistical measures of the trend rate of inflation (CPIX and CPIW) are currently very similar to that of core inflation.
However, the combined effect of these factors is expected to have largely run its course by early 2004.
The extent and the timing of this effect are particularly difficult to assess.
These assumptions for crude oil and natural gas prices are consistent with current expectations in futures markets.
Their relative performances differ noticeably.
The methodology used to compute the Bank of Canada's commodity price index has recently been improved to incorporate more accurate commodity weights and an expanded basket of benchmark oil prices to better measure the prices received by Canadian oil producers.
Measures of inflation expectations have been stable in recent months.
These overall figures mask important regional differences.
Overall, the Bank assesses that the risks to the projected path for inflation are roughly balanced.
Medium-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored at 2 per cent.
The April Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation was 2.4 per cent in 2011 and very close to the target in 2012 (2.1 per cent).
Economy-wide, the price level has remained virtually unchanged.
Thus, movements in that differential probably reflect changes in inflation expectations reasonably well.
By convention, the Bank assumes that energy prices will remain near levels observed over recent weeks.
CPI inflation is estimated to have averaged 1.8 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2017.
Based on prices embedded in energy futures markets, the Bank projects total CPI inflation (excluding any changes in the Goods and Services Tax) to average close to 2 per cent in 2007 and 2008.
Further details on the Bank's reassessment of potential output are provided in the Appendix.
By convention, the Bank assumes that energy prices will remain near their recent levels.
Data on Canadian firm creation also reveal adjustments.
Based on this assumption, the Bank assesses that the risks to the projected path for inflation are roughly balanced.
The Canada/US exchange rate has generally fluctuated between 65.3 and 68.3 cents since the May Report.
The comparable figure for the United States is about 2 per cent.
The inventory situation also appears to be close to balance.
Overall, the Bank judges that in the second quarter of 2017 the degree of excess capacity in the economy was between 0 and 1 per cent.
Consequently, the savings rate should remain close to recent levels.
Fan charts, which are derived using statistical analysis of ex post errors from the Bank's projection models, provide a complementary perspective.
Key measures of inflation expectations continue to be well anchored at 2 per cent.
These actions were prompted by two basic considerations.
Indicators of inflation expectations are consistent with the Bank's projection.
On balance, these factors have shifted the composition of aggregate demand towards growth in domestic demand and away from net exports.
There is also some question about the impact of measures to resolve the year-2000 problem.
Beyond the near term, the inflation projection is little changed from the April Report.
Developments in Europe have also affected bank lending conditions in a number of other countries.
Total inflation should then return to target by mid-2008.
In particular, the difference between the current policy rate and the neutral rate is an important determinant of the degree of support that policy is providing to economic activity.
