Exports contracted unexpectedly in the second half of 2012, reflecting weaker-than-anticipated foreign demand as well as temporary disruptions in the energy sector.
The shutdown will dampen economic growth in the fourth quarter, through the direct effect of furloughed government workers, and, more broadly, through negative effects on confidence.
In contrast, the economies of Brazil, Russia and Turkey are much weaker, partly as a result of political or geopolitical tensions.
In the euro area, real economic activity in the final quarter of 2004 was also weaker than anticipated, and the outlook has been revised down marginally.
Recovery in the advanced economies is still expected to be subdued, since private demand remains weak in most of these countries and fiscal stimulus will start to wind down later this year.
Growth in business investment in 2012 is projected to be somewhat constrained by uncertainty stemming from the fiscal debate in the United States and by the weaker global economy.
In emerging Asia, softer growth in China has mainly been felt through trade channels.
There also remains a small probability of a disorderly resolution of global imbalances.
Exports continued to fall as a result of reduced US spending on automobiles and machinery and equipment.
Conditions in global financial markets have deteriorated since the last Report and risk aversion has escalated.
This reflects weaker underlying momentum in exports and business fixed investment, as well as a smaller rebound from the temporary factors depressing growth in the second quarter.
Given the high degree of uncertainty around real-time estimates of the output gap, it is also possible that the level of economic slack is greater than currently estimated.
This was less than anticipated in both the last Report and the January Update.
The deterioration in industrial production in Germany and France suggests that depressed demand from the peripheral countries is increasingly affecting activity in the core countries, especially business investment.
The profile for government spending is lower than in the January Report, reflecting spending plans announced in recent budgets at all levels of government, as well as the latest information provided by the National Accounts.
The weakness in household spending is mainly due to lower expected real incomes, stemming from the deterioration in labour market conditions, weaker terms of trade, and lower growth in potential output.
Growth in final domestic demand is expected to be subdued until late in 2009, with growth of consumer spending well below its recent trend.
This more modest growth profile reflects a more gradual global recovery and a more subdued profile for household spending.
Business investment in the United States has been subdued, in part reflecting the cautiousness of firms in a highly uncertain environment.
Global growth prospects have weakened since April.
The wider economic and geopolitical consequences of the United Kingdom's decision to exit the European Union continue to be difficult to forecast.
The lacklustre pace of business spending has been assumed to reflect mostly cyclical factors, such as slower growth of global demand and heightened uncertainty.
Growth is estimated to have weakened significantly in the fourth quarter, however, reflecting the removal of certain fiscal incentives supporting household spending and the recent appreciation of the yen.
Thus, the overall pace of economic expansion was somewhat slower than was expected in the last Report.
The downward revision to the assumption for potential output growth also dampens future activity.
The slowing evident in the second quarter is projected to continue through the second half of this year, with GDP growth likely to be in the range of 2 to 2.5 per cent at annual rates - below the level of potential growth of the economy, which is now estimated at about 3.0 per cent.
Weaker-than-expected household spending would have a direct negative impact on real GDP.
Growth prospects in heavily indebted peripheral economies are much weaker and more uncertain than those of the core economies.
This uncertainty is likely to weigh on the decisions of businesses and households for some time to come.
Weak external demand (particularly from the euro area) is dampening exports.
Most importantly for Canada, the level of economic activity in the United States is somewhat weaker than was projected six months ago, and the outlook for US growth has been revised down slightly.
The profile of growth is modestly lower than projected in January, however, reflecting the weaker start to 2016 in some regions, as well as a small downward revision to the estimated path of global potential gross domestic product.
Wage growth has also continued to be moderate, consistent with the persistence of slack in the labour market.
Consequently, the weakness in resource exports and investment will be more pronounced and more persistent than previously anticipated.
In addition, global demand for commodities should ease as a result of the slowing in world economic growth.
Exports of machinery and equipment also fell sharply in the second quarter of 2006.
Euro-area GDP growth in 2013 and 2014 has therefore been revised down to -0.3 per cent and 0.8 per cent, respectively.
The weaker outlook for global demand will increase the drag on the Canadian economy coming from exports.
Over the medium term, global macroeconomic imbalances continue to pose significant risks to the outlook.
While the terrorist actions have accentuated the slowing in global activity in the very near term, it is very difficult to assess how long-lasting the negative effects will be.
Continuing high household debt levels in Canada could lead to weaker household spending.
Sales of existing homes have fallen, partly because of measures taken by federal authorities.
The persistent strength of the Canadian dollar could create even greater headwinds for the Canadian economy, putting additional downward pressure on inflation through weaker­ than ­expected net exports and larger declines in import prices.
At the same time, growth in final domestic demand in Canada has weakened over the past year.
Final domestic demand is expected to contract until the third quarter of 2009, owing to persistent weakness in private domestic demand.
Overall, a regional house price correction would most likely be localized but could have a material negative impact on the macroeconomic outlook.
Owing to the weaker profile for US GDP growth and tighter credit conditions, projected rates of GDP growth in Europe and Japan have been reduced for 2008 and 2009, but are expected to move slightly above potential rates in 2010.
Such a fall in house prices could further weigh on consumption through negative wealth and collateral effects.
In particular, business investment declined, and government capital formation remained subdued, the latter consistent with reported delays in infrastructure spending.
Together, weaker exports and business investment pose a downside risk to inflation.
Information to date suggests that economic growth slowed somewhat further in the third quarter.
Weaker activity in China in early 2015 contributed to a slowdown in growth across emerging-market economies.
Over the projection horizon, residential investment as a share of GDP is expected to edge down.
In the face of weak domestic demand, heightened uncertainty about the outlook, and adverse credit conditions, business investment has been subdued.
Contraction of business investment in the energy sector has been an important drag on economic activity.
The prospects for global economic growth have weakened since the April Monetary Policy Report.
Investment in housing is expected to post outright decreases until late 2009.
At the same time, subdued foreign demand and persistent competitiveness challenges are restraining the pace of export growth.
At the same time, global competition and the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar continue to pose challenges for a number of sectors.
The Canadian economy contracted by 1.6 per cent (at an annualized rate) in the second quarter of 2016.
The US economy is judged to be in recession through the first quarter of 2009, and to remain weaker than previously projected over the balance of the year, as tighter credit conditions and waning confidence lower household consumption and reduce residential and business investment.
Overall, growth should slow to around 1 per cent over 2018-19, reflecting demographics and other structural factors, and a sluggish pace of nominal wage increases.
The pace of business investment is projected to moderate in 2001.
The lower rate of growth projected for the first half of 2005 stems mainly from the anticipated slowing in the rate of inventory accumulation.
The euro area is in recession.
While the Bank's projection for exports is cautious, there is a risk that exports will fall short of expectations, given continuing competitiveness challenges.
Nevertheless, firms directly or indirectly exposed to the energy sector reported a tightening in credit conditions.
This would have additional negative consequences for Canada.
The global expansion has been held back for the past several years by three headwinds.
The slowdown in the demand for import-intensive items, such as machinery and equipment and motor vehicles, contributed to a pronounced reduction in the growth of import volumes.
Growth in real GDP appears to have decelerated in the first quarter, mainly as a result of weaker consumption growth.
Nonetheless, the factors that weighed on investment growth in the second half of 2012 are expected to persist for some time.
Brazil, in particular, has been suffering a deep recession that is now expected to be more prolonged than first anticipated.
Business investment growth is also projected to be somewhat weaker, reflecting ongoing challenges in the resource sector and firms' broader concerns regarding the strength of global and domestic demand.
The General Motors strike in October led to a temporary decrease in automotive export volumes - and output - in the fourth quarter of 1996.
In particular, slowing world economic growth has led to a further reduction in the prices of metals, pulp, newsprint, and livestock.
This is less than was projected in the October Report and the last Update.
However, the slowing US economy has had a moderating effect on economic growth in Canada.
Weaker growth in US output in the near term, particularly in business and residential investment, will dampen Canadian exports relative to what had been expected in July.
A weaker global outlook is now expected to further moderate income growth.
Weaker growth in the United States relative to earlier expectations, together with heightened levels of uncertainty in global markets, will also adversely affect other industrialized economies.
The US slowdown has its roots in several factors.
These drops reflected the deterioration of the profit outlook as the global economic slowdown became more evident.
This is slightly weaker than assumed in the previous projection.
However, the recent substantial appreciation of the Canadian dollar is likely to be a continuing source of downward pressure on core inflation until the end of 2004 - although there is considerable uncertainty about the extent of the pass-through of exchange rate movements to consumer prices.
The disasters that struck Japan in March will severely affect its economic activity in the first half of this year and create short-­term disruptions to supply chains in advanced economies.
Since the July Update, the outlook for the US economy has weakened because of greater-than-expected slowing in the housing sector.
The forecast for real GDP growth has been revised down since the July Report, primarily because of a weaker outlook for exports and the housing market.
Prices of non-energy commodities have softened since the July Report.
The Japanese economy is still fragile, however: the financial sector requires further restructuring, and household spending remains weak.
As a result of the sharper contraction in the global economy, economic growth in Canada has been much weaker than anticipated in the January Update.
Weaker growth in domestic demand in the United States would further reduce demand for Canadian exports and would lower inflation relative to the base-case projection.
Growth in the euro-area economy will likely remain anemic, owing to high debt levels, tight credit conditions and weak labour markets.
Slower growth abroad would affect exports, those to the United States being the most important.
Slower export growth is also projected, owing to weaker global demand.
Real GDP appears to have stalled in the first quarter, a weaker outcome than anticipated in January.
The appreciation of the Canadian dollar through 2003 and 2004, which had contributed importantly to the decline in exports in the second half of 2004, did not appear to have significant additional adverse effects on the level of exports in the first half of 2005.
At the same time, global oil demand has been repeatedly revised down.
Net exports, in contrast, are likely to weigh on growth.
Weak labour market conditions continue to restrain household income, with the level of employment still 4.5 million below its previous peak.
Recent data suggest that underlying fundamentals for household spending have weakened over the past few months.
The global economy has suffered an intense, synchronous recession and considerable excess supply has opened up.
As well, the appreciation of the Canadian dollar over the past four years continued to restrain growth in the demand for Canadian exports.
This chiefly reflects the easing of demand caused by unusually mild winter weather conditions in North America.
Growth in exports has decelerated more abruptly, in response to weaker demand from Europe, which accounts for around one-fifth of Chinese exports.
Firms in the oil and gas sector have significantly reduced investment and employment.
The persistent weakness in overall business investment raises the issue of whether structural factors, such as declining labour force growth, weaker total factor productivity growth and regulatory obstacles, might be playing a greater role than previously assumed.
However, the contribution of net exports to GDP growth over 2018 and 2019 is slightly weaker than anticipated in the July Report following the recent appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
The drop in oil prices is expected to lead to a rapid contraction in investment in the oil and gas sector.
A weaker near-term outlook for the US economy has curbed the near-term prospects for Canadian exports and growth.
At the same time, oil-exporting countries have had to adjust to the deterioration in their terms of trade.
The broad forces of household, bank and sovereign deleveraging will continue to restrain growth in many advanced economies.
Residential investment remains very weak.
The weakening in industrial materials prices received by Canadian commodity producers has been reflected in a marked deceleration in the year-over-year rise in both the aggregate industrial product price index and aggregate export prices.
This slowdown in global economic growth reflects the weakening in the US economy and the dislocations in global financial markets stemming from problems in the US subprime-mortgage market.
This base-case scenario assumes that the crisis in the euro area will be contained, although this assumption is clearly subject to downside risks.
Business credit, in contrast, has been much weaker, recording no growth overall in the three months to May, reflecting the weak outlook for business investment, the drawdown in inventories, and tight credit conditions.
This decline is mainly tied to falling energy prices stemming from lower prices for crude oil.
The Japanese economy remains in recession, and the major European economies have been weakening.
In contrast, the growth of government spending on goods and services lessened appreciably.
Nevertheless, the terms and conditions of credit have tightened, and access to bank financing for new clients has been reduced.
Weaker growth in EMEs would dampen US exports (which often have considerable Canadian content), further undermine confidence, push down commodity prices, and increase uncertainty and financial volatility.
Residential construction decreased as expected.
The real growth of government spending on goods and services is projected to decelerate and to average just over 3 per cent through 2010.
At the same time, slowing external demand and the recent sharp appreciation of the yen are expected to weigh on export growth.
Relative to the April Report, growth prospects in the euro area are weaker over the entire projection horizon, owing to more restrictive financial conditions, additional fiscal austerity measures and lower confidence.
In Japan, economic indicators were relatively solid before the Tohoku earthquake caused major destruction and disruptions to the economy.
By itself, this drop would reduce overall business investment by about 10 per cent.
Not surprisingly, responses from firms in the Prairies are particularly negative.
Prices for non-energy commodities, particularly metals, have also decreased, largely in line with the weaker global economic outlook.
Both factors contributed to declining consumer confidence through the first three quarters of 1998.
Reflecting the ongoing weakness in activity in advanced economies, China's export growth has decelerated recently.
The US economic slowdown and the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar led to a reduction in Canadian export volumes, especially machinery and equipment and consumer goods.
At the same time, investment plans in the oil and gas sector are being sharply curtailed.
These disruptions could translate into a decline in confidence and economic activity (especially in sectors sensitive to interest rates), reduced wealth, a rise in debt-service burdens, and weaker global and Canadian growth.
This outlook for growth is weaker over the near term than in the April Report.
Falling commodity prices resulted in declines in the prices of most manufactured intermediate goods.
Income from wages and salaries continued to fall, as did employment (by 9 per cent since last October in the mining, quarrying, and oil and gas extraction industries).
In Europe, economic activity in the first half of 2009 was weaker than expected, owing to sharp declines in investment and net exports and an ongoing inventory correction.
Although the decline in exports appears to have slowed, Canadian exporters continue to face a challenging environment, with the weakness in US demand, the recent appreciation of the Canadian dollar, and ongoing restructuring in the automotive and forest products sectors.
Canadian export volumes are projected to decline through 2009, given the weakness of US demand.
External demand for Canada's exports remains weak.
The level of real GDP has been markedly lower in the second and third quarters than the Bank had projected, suggesting that the output gap in the third quarter was considerably wider than anticipated in July.
These measures leave the level of real GDP 0.3 per cent lower at the end of 2018.
The negative effects of low oil prices on US oil investment have materialized quickly and have been somewhat more significant than anticipated.
Exports from these countries are being affected by the weaker growth in the United States and the effects of a sharp appreciation of the euro and the yen.
Recent monthly data on goods exports have disappointed.
Some of the weakness in recent months may also be due to weather-related factors.
Relative to the April Report, oil prices are expected to be substantially weaker through 2014, largely owing to diminished prospects for global demand.
September's terrorist attacks and their aftermath have had a further significant negative impact on the US economy.
This decline was not anticipated in last November's Report.
This growth projection for 2005 is also lower than the latest Consensus outlook.
Europe is in recession and recent indicators point to a continued contraction.
The projected moderation in household spending will be led by a slower pace of growth in housing expenditures.
The weaker profile for investment in this projection, relative to previous ones, should also contribute to dampening the growth of trend labour productivity.
Underlying inflationary pressures remain subdued in light of persistent excess capacity, particularly in the labour markets of a number of advanced economies, where wage growth remains weak.
A key concern for the global projection is the extent to which the US recovery may be restrained by slower growth in other regions - repeating the serial disappointments that have plagued the global economy since the crisis.
The recent deceleration in the growth of labour compensation, which is expected to persist and to be reinforced by the spending restraint measures recently announced in the public sector, is contributing to a marked slowdown in the growth of unit labour costs.
Exports have been restrained by the past appreciation of the yen and the euro, as well as by weaker demand from major trading partners.
Business investment has been very weak recently.
Weaker exports and commodity prices would also have negative implications for business investment.
Projections of world economic growth for 2001 have been revised down in recent months, reflecting a slower pace of growth not only in the United States but in most other parts of the world as well.
Sales of motor vehicles were sharply lower than in the previous year, and ongoing restructuring in the North American auto sector suggests that total production for 2009 will be at its lowest level in over 30 years.
Canada's terms of trade decreased further in the second half of 2006, owing to somewhat lower prices for energy commodities after the middle of the year.
The Bank of Canada's index of global commodity prices has declined by about 4 per cent since the release of the July Report.
Weak exports of non-commodity goods can be linked, in part, to tepid foreign demand.
Nevertheless, exports in 2017 are weaker than in the October Report.
This is a somewhat weaker profile than anticipated in the April Report.
Industrial production also fell as firms strove to bring stock levels into line with demand.
The Japanese economy contracted substantially during the first half of 1998.
Economic activity in Canada has recently been weaker than was anticipated in the October Report, largely because of lower commodity prices.
Uncertainty surrounding the global outlook is an important risk for inflation in Canada.
In contrast, residential investment is expected to decline further in the coming quarters, making little contribution to overall GDP growth over the projection horizon.
Relative to expectations at the time of the January Report, the outlook for the euro area has been revised downward.
Domestic demand growth in the United States is expected to continue to slow into 2007, owing largely to a downturn in household spending on interest-sensitive goods, such as housing, motor vehicles, and other durables.
Activity in oil-importing EMEs has slowed in 2015.
The recent decreases in commodity prices are likely to lead to further cutbacks in production at high-cost sites.
The outlook for the euro area is clouded by weak domestic demand.
This outlook for the Canadian economy is weaker over the near term than anticipated in the April Report.
Recent data show a decline in drilling rig activity and weakness in imports of machinery and equipment.
There has been a decrease in housing starts and a sharp drop in resales and sales-to-listings ratios in Alberta in December.
As a result, Canada's terms of trade have deteriorated.
This decline was not anticipated.
While weakness is expected to be concentrated in the advanced countries, softer external demand and somewhat tighter global credit conditions will also restrain growth in emerging markets over the near term.
Japan and Germany have been particularly affected by the collapse in global demand for autos and it - related goods, as well as by the past appreciations of their currencies.
However, commodity prices have retreated considerably since the July Report.
Continued slowing in domestic demand, particularly for import-intensive items such as machinery and equipment, restrained import growth over the final two quarters of 1998 relative to that experienced in 1997.
This decline in inventory investment largely reflected the response of manufacturers and wholesalers to the drop in foreign demand in the second half of 2004.
Over the last six months, short-term inflation expectations have declined further.
The slowdown was primarily the result of weakness in net exports and, to a lesser extent, a drag from softer investment in fixed assets in the manufacturing sector - in part because of the ongoing restructuring in industries with excess capacity, such as steel.
Growth in the core economies has slowed significantly, while economic activity in the periphery remains subdued.
Construction activity in the United States has remained weak, and house prices have fallen further.
The outlook for the US economy now incorporates a more pronounced and protracted slowdown in domestic demand.
Slower EME growth could affect Canada through weaker commodity prices and export sales, as well as through greater global uncertainty and financial volatility.
Third, business and consumer sentiment in Canada is expected to soften somewhat.
The fall in housing activity and house prices is projected to continue until the second half of 2009.
As a consequence, euro-area banks have continued to tighten credit conditions.
As the Bank had expected, housing activity has declined markedly in recent months.
The euro area remains in recession, however, and economic activity is being constrained by fiscal austerity, low confidence and tight credit conditions.
Growth in 2011, however, is now projected to be somewhat weaker.
Cuts to capital expenditures will temper future production and exports in the oil sector.
Failure to contain the crisis in Europe remains the most serious risk facing the global and Canadian economies.
The Bank already projects a significant decline in investment in the oil and gas sector in 2015.
Further contraction is anticipated in the second half of the year, given worsening labour market conditions, falling domestic and foreign demand, and increasingly difficult financing conditions for firms.
The growth of imports is expected to slow with decelerating domestic demand.
As in the July Report, investment in the oil and gas sector is expected to decline by nearly 40 per cent in 2015.
Deteriorating labour market conditions, combined with an additional decline in household net worth, are expected to cause further weakness in household spending.
Growth in Japan, in contrast, slowed sharply toward the end of 2010, following the unwinding of some fiscal support.
Low prices and competitiveness challenges continue to dampen investment spending in mining.
Relative to the April Report, the projected profile for business investment is less robust, partly reflecting recent sharp declines in commodity prices and the more subdued global economic outlook.
The Bank's projection for potential output growth has been revised down.
Economic activity has slowed in some EMEs.
Real GDP growth in other emerging-market economies , such as Russia and India, has also slowed in recent quarters, owing to structural constraints and weak external demand.
In contrast, the level of business fixed investment is still very depressed.
Consumer spending has been dampened by the increase in payroll taxes in January 2013 and a moderation in employment growth.
In contrast, economic activity in the euro area remains weak, owing to fiscal austerity, fragmented access to credit and low confidence.
The Bank's base-case projection for Canada is now weaker for both 2008 and 2009 than that in the January Update.
Employment gains have remained sluggish since the start of the year, with net job creation in the private sector slowing and governments continuing to cut their payrolls.
In contrast, business investment contracted for the third consecutive quarter.
However, exports of commodities (especially forest products) to Japan and other East Asian countries declined considerably.
At the same time, new trade restrictions are heavily constraining softwood lumber exports.
The most recent data also show that the level of real GDP was 0.1 per cent weaker than expected in the fourth quarter of 2017.
A drop in house prices would likely dampen residential investment and consumption in these areas.
The main driver of the weakness was the sharp contraction in oil and gas related industries as they adjusted to lower prices.
Overall, growth in consumption is expected to ease as growth in disposable income gradually slows, partly as the effect of the introduction of the Canada Child Benefit fades.
While the outlook for business investment already reflects some of the adverse impact coming from elevated US policy uncertainty, further downside risks remain.
The outlook for the global economy has deteriorated and uncertainty has increased since October.
Growth in exports is expected to slow in 2012, owing to weaker growth in global demand as well as the recent appreciation of the US dollar, which partly reflected international investor demand for the safety and liquidity of US Treasury securities.
Exports are expected to have continued to fall.
A notable increase in global protectionism remains the most important source of uncertainty facing the Canadian economy.
The Canadian economy is evolving largely as expected, but the outlook needs to be viewed in the context of elevated policy uncertainty at the global level.
Weaker investment in the oil and gas industry will also constrain investment demand in industries linked to the energy sector.
Investment in new projects is being held back by reduced competitiveness resulting from regulatory and US policy changes.
Together, weaker exports and business investment would pose a downside risk to inflation.
It is possible that markets have overreacted to slower growth in China, perceiving recent data as indicative of substantially weaker activity and commodity demand.
The Canadian economy contracted modestly in the first half of 2015.
Conditions in contracting economies such as Brazil have not improved by as much as anticipated, however.
Real GDP growth moderated sharply in the fourth quarter of last year, however, and is projected to average less than 2.0 per cent per year through 2013 as the impetus from the rebuilding of infrastructure wanes.
This is also less than previously anticipated and reflects evidence suggesting considerably weaker inventory accumulation by businesses than in the second quarter.
This projection for GDP growth is marked down from April.
A larger decline in domestic demand in the United States would lead to decreased demand for Canadian exports and broader weakness in the Canadian economy.
Given the magnitude and pace of the commodity price decline and the complexity and protracted nature of the adjustment process - with important structural and cyclical implications - there is particular uncertainty about the recovery in aggregate demand and economic activity, the level and evolution of potential output, and thus the timing of the economy's return to full potential.
Weaker exports would have negative implications for business investment since firms would hold back on expanding domestic capacity.
Residential investment is therefore projected to decline from the current historically high levels toward a more sustainable position.
With the weakness in US housing activity, lumber prices are likely to remain low.
Investment growth has been revised down from the January Report, since the uncertainty about US trade policy is now projected to persist for longer than previously assumed.
The expected deceleration of the US economy, in addition to reduced stimulus from the earlier depreciation of the Canadian dollar, should begin to ease export growth some time this year.
Subsequently, some Latin American economies came under financial pressure.
At the same time, residential investment has declined further from historically high levels, owing to lower rates of new construction.
The recession in the euro area is now expected to last longer and to be somewhat deeper than anticipated in the October Report, owing to tighter credit conditions, additional fiscal austerity measures and more negative confidence effects.
However, the softness in exports in the third quarter was also attributable to such temporary factors as the idling of oil pipelines.
The revision primarily reflects weaker-than-expected investment in EMEs, particularly those that export oil.
In contrast, banks in the euro area have tightened terms and conditions on business credit.
EMEs with large stocks of debt denominated in foreign currencies remain particularly vulnerable to sudden shifts in market sentiment.
The projected profile for Canadian exports has also been revised down, reflecting the lower level of foreign economic activity.
In particular, exports and business fixed investment have been weaker, reflecting both foreign and domestic developments.
Real GDP is expected to have expanded at a slower pace in the third quarter than anticipated in the July Report.
Credit growth in the private sector continues to decline in the euro area and remains relatively low in Japan.
After growing at a healthy pace in the second half of 2013, the world economy experienced a sharp and broad-based slowdown in economic activity and trade in the first quarter of this year.
The negative effects of US tax reforms on Canadian investment have been introduced in this projection and are expected to subtract 0.5 per cent from the level of investment by the end of 2019.
Investment in the technology sector was hit particularly hard.
The resulting weaker-than-expected foreign demand would be an additional drag on Canadian exports and business investment.
The recovery in other industrial economies will be more delayed and more gradual than in the united states, owing to the less-ambitious policy actions undertaken so far and to ongoing difficulties in their banking systems.
For Canada, the risks of weaker global demand beginning some time in 2007 would imply less demand for Canadian products, less buoyancy in commodity prices and, hence, less growth in business investment.
In an environment of continued high uncertainty, the global recession has intensified and become more synchronous since the Bank's January Monetary Policy Report Update, with weaker-than-expected activity in all major economies.
Demand for Canadian exports could be weaker than expected if authorities in the United States do not smooth the path of fiscal consolidation to avoid the fiscal cliff or if the slowdown in emerging-market economies is greater than expected.
US regional banks are not as strong financially as the large money-centre banks, and are therefore more constrained in supplying credit to businesses and households.
The US economic recovery is projected to proceed more slowly than in previous cycles, reflecting somewhat weaker growth in the rest of the world, the unwinding of fiscal stimulus measures, and ongoing deleveraging by households and financial institutions.
The recent weakness in business investment could reflect more persistent structural factors.
Recent indicators also suggest that GDP growth in Brazil will remain subdued in the second half of 2012.
Indeed, corporate debt and equity issuance have effectively stopped.
First and foremost, the intensification of the global financial crisis in recent weeks has been reflected in severe strains in global money and credit markets and sharp falls and extreme volatility in global equity markets.
At US$4.20 per million BTU, however, prices remain well below the average level of US$5.60 recorded over the past ten years.
However, growth in 2012 is expected to be slightly weaker than anticipated, owing to the restraining effects of tighter monetary and credit measures.
With the growth of income now expected to be slightly softer than was expected at the time of the April Report, primarily because of the weaker global outlook and a lower assumed profile for commodity prices, consumption is correspondingly expected to be lower.
These exchange rate adjustments have led to a weaker growth outlook for the US economy in 2015 than anticipated in the January Report, through a drag from net trade.
Slower export demand from advanced economies will moderate economic growth in emerging-market economies.
These include elevated uncertainty about the global economic outlook, lower energy prices received by Canadian producers and the softness in domestic demand.
Conditions in global financial markets have tightened in recent months as the sovereign debt crisis in the euro area has deepened and banking sector stress has remained elevated.
These shocks could have negative spillover effects on the global economy and would be transmitted to the Canadian economy through weaker exports, lower commodity prices and a deterioration in the terms of trade.
With weaker global demand, prospects for several emerging-market economies have deteriorated.
Weaker sales of US motor vehicles, however, contributed to a decrease in Canadian exports of automotive products, while the downturn in the US housing market held back exports of forest products.
The recovery is projected to be more subdued than usual, since complex processes of deleveraging and real adjustment are yet to be completed in the aftermath of the financial crisis.
At the same time, the weaker economic growth in the second quarter of 2006, combined with projected growth of 2 per cent in the third quarter (compared with a projection of 3 per cent in the July Update), implies that the level of activity in the third quarter was also somewhat lower than expected.
Growth is projected to slow markedly in Japan in 2011, reflecting the unwinding of fiscal incentives, the earlier appreciation of the yen and the drop in output stemming from the damage caused by the earthquake.
The Bank now estimates that real GDP growth stalled in the fourth quarter of 2015, resulting in a more pronounced slowdown than previously expected.
Economic growth in Canada is expected to slow somewhat in the fourth quarter of this year and in the first half of 2003.
Weaker business investment would also reduce capital deepening and lower potential output, partially mitigating the disinflationary effect of weaker demand.
The loss of income and wealth associated with the deterioration in the terms of trade will have a dampening effect on spending.
On the downside, the US economy may slow more than expected, and the Chinese economy may slow more abruptly than projected.
As it turns out, growth has been weaker than expected and is now likely to average just over 1.5 per cent in the first three quarters of the year.
In the euro area, domestic demand remains weak.
Output growth is expected to be well below potential for the remainder of 2008 and in 2009, reflecting reduced demand for exports stemming from the adverse impact of the past appreciation of their currencies and weaker global demand.
On the one hand, the adverse developments in Asia, particularly in Japan, were increasingly weighing on the Canadian economy.
In contrast, outside the resource sector, the expansion of exports and investment spending remained subdued.
This was a somewhat softer pace of growth than the Bank had expected, however, largely reflecting slightly weaker consumption and business investment, as well as temporary factors such as disruptions in the energy sector.
The US slowdown has, in fact, turned out to be more pronounced than expected, and, largely as a consequence, growth in global demand has been weaker than projected.
These uncertainties and the weaker global outlook are likely to dampen growth in aggregate demand for Canadian output over the near term.
The knock-on effects in Canada from weaker US demand and financial market turbulence would have significant consequences for our exports and for domestic economic activity.
Geopolitical tensions and supply disruptions may also lead to lower-than-expected growth of supply.
