Overall, however, total export volumes should continue to expand because of improved Canadian competitiveness, arising from the recent currency depreciation and from Canada's good price and cost performance relative to its trading partners.
Housing starts, sales of new and existing homes, and builder and realtor sentiment have all improved noticeably.
In Canada, the economic recovery is proceeding somewhat more rapidly than the Bank had projected in January and the profile for growth is more front-loaded.
Economic activity in emerging-market countries - most notably China - is growing at a rapid pace, and the recovery has now extended to most of the advanced economies, with positive output growth recorded in both North America and the Euro area in the third quarter.
Marked employment gains over the past year were particularly evident in full-time, non-self-employed positions.
A strengthening of the pace of economic expansion in the United States provided some support for Canada's exports.
Strengthening demand has contributed to recoveries in the prices of both lumber and pulp.
Canadian exports surged in the second quarter, supported by stronger US investment spending and the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar.
In the United States, new government spending plans, in addition to previously announced tax cuts, are expected to boost growth over the next few years.
Business investment is expected to expand at a solid pace.
Stronger demand in the United States would be transmitted to the Canadian economy through the trade channel and higher commodity prices.
Growth in emerging-market economies, in contrast, continues to be robust.
Growth of both business and household credit accelerated in July and August from already robust levels.
Economic developments during the second half of 1996, as well as more recent indicators, point to a continuation of robust expansion through the balance of 1997 and into 1998.
Canadian exports would benefit from firmer global demand.
The continued strength in commodity prices since the January Update has reflected the robust global economy.
The positive reaction by financial markets to the measures contained in the federal budget also provided an important steadying influence.
At the same time, expectations of continued strong demand for housing in North America for 2004 and a desire by US lumber wholesalers to restore inventories to more normal levels contributed to a sharp rise in lumber prices.
GDP growth is projected to average 2 1/2 per cent in the second and third quarters and remain above potential output growth.
However, some non-energy commodity firms face more-favourable conditions.
With continued strong growth in the global economy, Canada's exports rose substantially.
The outlook for advanced economies is stronger than in October: economic growth for the United States, in particular, has been revised up, reflecting stronger momentum and recent tax reform legislation.
Reflecting these healthy corporate financial results, the TSX has risen strongly.
Solid household spending will be supplemented by a continued recovery in non-energy exports and investment.
Overall, the Bank judges that these risks are tilted to the upside.
The pace of US economic activity is expected to improve gradually through 2013 and 2014.
Analysis suggests that incorporating these new measures, as well as the recent measures introduced at the provincial level, into the projection results in a contribution to GDP growth of government spending of 0.5 percentage points in 2016 and 0.6 percentage points in 2017.
The overall improvement reflected a recovery in the terms of trade, chiefly because of rising commodity prices.
Exports are expected to recover substantially in light of the anticipated growth of the US economy.
Economic growth is expected to become more solidly entrenched over the projection period as self-sustaining growth in private demand takes hold.
Non-commodity exports will also be supported by continued growth in foreign demand.
Financial conditions in Canada, as in the rest of the world generally, have continued the improvement noted in the October Report.
Indeed, data for July and August show a sharp acceleration in exports, consistent with the strength of US demand.
The Bank continues to forecast solid growth in business fixed investment over the projection horizon.
Stronger growth prospects are reflected in improvements in indicators of business optimism and consumer confidence.
The main upside risks to inflation relate to the possibility of a stronger-than-anticipated recovery in the global economy.
Employment and average hours worked have picked up in recent months, and the unemployment rate edged back down to 8.4 per cent in September.
The 1997 forecast was marginally higher than six months earlier.
Developments in Mexico have also been positive.
Over the projection horizon, exports are forecast to grow by a modest 2.5 per cent, led by strengthening global demand.
All measures of wages have picked up in recent months and are now more consistent with other indicators of tightness in labour markets.
For example, these pressures have resulted in marked increases in the prices of shelter and some services.
Taking all of these factors into account, the recovery in capital spending over the near term is now projected to be slightly more robust.
The other major development internationally has been the sharp rise and volatility in world oil prices.
The solid growth in household income, the acceleration in the growth of household credit and broad monetary aggregates, and the continued strength in house prices all point to the risk of greater momentum in household spending.
As a result, the economy has moved towards full production capacity more quickly than was expected in April.
Overall, the global economy is projected to grow by 2.8 per cent in 2013 and accelerate to 3.4 per cent in 2014 and 3.6 per cent in 2015.
However, economic growth is expected to gain momentum over 2013-14, as the growth of exports to advanced economies recovers.
The Chinese economy continues to rebalance toward a more sustainable growth path, broadly in line with the expectations set out in the October Report.
India and Indonesia are benefiting from successful political transitions, and structural reforms in Mexico are fostering robust growth.
Lumber prices have risen modestly, supported by strong demand associated with higher single-family housing starts in the United States.
This substantial policy easing will help boost the growth of domestic demand in Japan over the projection horizon.
Household expenditures are expected to grow at a moderate pace over the projection horizon.
While there may be continued short-term volatility, commodity prices are projected to continue to increase as the global economy recovers in 2010 and 2011.
Employment in these sectors has risen appreciably since the middle of last year.
World commodity prices (quoted in US dollars) have risen sharply in the past year.
Fundamental factors supporting the Canadian dollar against the US dollar include a resilient domestic economy, favourable interest rate differentials, and firm commodity prices.
Real gross domestic income increased significantly, however, reflecting an improvement in Canada's terms of trade.
The Canadian economy has been expanding at a rate above its growth potential, with levels of activity now close to full production capacity, and there have been remarkable gains in employment.
Household expenditures in Canada have been stronger than expected and could have more momentum than currently projected.
Private sector demand in the United States has been stronger than expected, and could continue to surprise on the upside given the degree of household deleveraging that has already taken place.
The US economy appears to have expanded at a healthy pace in 2015.
On the other hand, prices for grains and oilseeds are anticipated to remain strong for some time as a result of the surging demand for biofuels.
In part, this more favourable near-term outlook reflects temporary factors, such as the rebound in auto production and pent-up demand for housing.
Through the July-August period, there was a positive shift in sentiment towards North American currencies.
Together with services exports, several goods components, such as aircraft and related parts and pharmaceutical and medicinal products, are expected to lead the recovery in non-commodity exports.
The Canadian economy grew strongly in 2017, and the level of economic activity is now close to capacity.
With the significant improvement in Canada's terms of trade in the second half of 2005, the chain price index for GDP (a broad price measure of the goods and services produced in Canada) rose 4.1 per cent between the fourth quarter of 2004 and the fourth quarter of 2005.
The anticipated improvement in global economic growth, particularly in US business and residential investment, is expected to lift Canadian exports over the projection horizon.
The very substantial increases in both full-time jobs and hiring by firms (as opposed to self-employment) have kept consumer confidence high.
Imports continued to show strong growth in the last six months of 1999 and in early 2000, mainly reflecting the rapid advance in domestic demand for import-intensive items such as machinery and equipment and motor vehicles.
In Japan, activity related to reconstruction helped boost the growth of real GDP to 5.6 per cent in the third quarter of 2011.
However, a modest upward trend in the overall commodity price index should resume by mid-1997, which should support Canadian production.
New construction is forecast to contribute positively, particularly in Ontario, where housing demand has been outpacing supply.
Economic activity has grown strongly in recent quarters.
Canada's exports have rebounded, reflecting renewed economic growth in the United States since the last quarter of 2001.
This reacceleration appeared to largely reflect transitory factors that boosted the demand for mortgage credit, notably the lagged effects of the surge in sales of existing homes in the fourth quarter of last year, as well as some pulling forward of activity related to recent changes to mortgage insurance regulations.
Job gains have been healthy, and business and consumer confidence have remained high.
There are also indications of a pickup in domestic demand.
Bank profits and capitalization have generally strengthened worldwide.
British Columbia and Ontario have shown strong net job growth.
This pickup in demand should, in turn, result in greater business investment.
As well, the ongoing strength in the US labour market and the creation of new businesses may draw discouraged workers back into the labour force.
Recent improvements in financing costs and conditions should further support business investment.
Recent data remain consistent with a broad-based pickup in non-energy exports, in line with a continued strengthening of the US economy and the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar.
Economic growth is expected to remain broad-based across sectors.
Economic activity has picked up in several other emerging-market economies.
The outlook for economic growth in the euro area has strengthened in recent months.
In addition, some indicators of business sentiment have improved in recent quarters.
The latest crude oil futures curve, however, suggests that prices will be higher than previously anticipated.
In contrast, strong world demand has led to firmness in metals prices.
Meanwhile, growth was supported by an unexpectedly strong and broad increase in business investment, including a sharp rebound in energy investment.
Increased foreign demand and fiscal spending, as well as the effects of the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar, are expected to lift real GDP growth.
The economy is then expected to grow by 2.8 per cent in 2014 and by 2.7 per cent in 2015, well above the estimated growth of potential output.
Growth in both the emerging-market and European economies has accelerated, and the pace of the economic expansion in the United States has increased even further.
In the fourth quarter of 2016, growth has been revised up by 0.3 percentage points to 2.5 per cent.
Stronger-than-expected private demand in the United States is the most important upside risk to inflation in Canada.
This rise in consumer spending, combined with positive indicators of activity in the housing sector and non-residential construction, suggest a notable rebound in growth in the second quarter.
Accordingly, past depreciation of the Canadian dollar continued to have a substantial impact on consumer prices over the last six months.
The year-over-year increase in the average hourly wage (excluding overtime) for permanent workers, a relatively new addition to Statistics Canada's Labour Force Information, has shown a moderately accelerating trend since late 1998.
The Chinese economy has performed more strongly than expected in January.
Economic activity picked up significantly in the second half of 1996, broadly in line with expectations.
In contrast, monetary policy is projected to remain highly accommodative.
The pace of economic growth in Canada is expected to have accelerated to 3.3 per cent in the final quarter of 2009, with final domestic demand and exports continuing to grow rapidly and import growth moderating.
In this base-case projection, accommodative monetary policy, including some further monetary stimulus in 2008, a gradual recovery in the US economy, and the eventual return to more normal credit conditions globally and in Canada, all help to bring aggregate demand back into balance with aggregate supply around mid-2010.
Notably, year-over-year growth in the number of manufacturing firms turned positive in first quarter of 2015 for the first time since 2008.
US economic activity strengthened through 2014.
Beyond 2017, GDP growth is forecast to broaden further across demand categories.
With economic activity firming, current levels of futures contracts indicate that financial market participants expect the Federal Reserve and the Bank to raise their respective target rates in coming months.
Final domestic demand also rose considerably, especially at the beginning of the year.
Increases in business investment are expected to remain strong over the projection horizon.
The monetary aggregates have continued to grow strongly.
Sectoral analysis also suggests that conditions for investment in the non-resource sector have generally improved since 2014.
In addition, there may be some upside risks to the trend rate of growth of labour inputs, at least over the near term.
The growth outlook for most other regions is also modestly stronger than anticipated in the January Monetary Policy Report.
Exports of a wide range of Canadian goods are expected to benefit, including aircraft, medium and heavy trucks, and specialized machinery and equipment.
This is expected to have a positive impact on Canada's terms of trade.
Both external and domestic factors suggest that economic activity should expand faster in the second half of 1996 than was the case between mid-1995 and mid-1996.
Profits have risen sharply, particularly in the resource and manufacturing sectors.
The firmness in a range of housing market indicators in recent months reinforces this possibility.
This has been most evident in Southeast Asia, where there have been signs of significant progress towards economic stabilization.
Canada's real GDP advanced at an annual rate of 3.7 per cent in the first half of 2004, higher than that projected in the last Report.
Since a large share of investment goods are foreign-sourced, this strengthening of investment is expected to lead to an increase in imports.
Much of the improvement in Canada reflects the strong performance of the energy sector.
Increases in labour compensation are expected to move up slightly through 2004, as labour market conditions improve.
Recent indicators, such as resales, housing starts and prices, point to continued momentum.
The projection for economic activity through 2016 and 2017 has been revised up.
Over the second half of 1997, the underlying momentum of the economy remained robust.
In Canada, the economic expansion has been proceeding largely as expected in the April Report.
Global commodity prices remain elevated.
These developments provide a favourable environment for future economic growth.
As a result, the growth outlook for 2017 is now above 2 per cent.
The Bank now projects that economic expansion in both the United States and Canada will begin to strengthen towards the end of this year and will be above the growth of potential output during 2004.
Stronger US household spending and public and private investment would have positive spillovers for Canadian business confidence, investment and exports.
At this pace, capacity pressures will intensify.
Solid foreign demand and the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar will continue to support non-commodity exports.
In Japan, economic activity in the second quarter strengthened significantly more than expected, resulting in an improved economic outlook for 2017.
The increased demand was again concentrated in components such as machinery and equipment and consumer purchases of motor vehicles, most of which tend to be imported.
Conditions in global financial markets have improved, on balance, since the release of the January Report.
Real GDP growth in China remained strong at around 10 per cent in the second and third quarters.
Consumer confidence has hovered near post-recession highs.
The positive trend in investment spending is expected to reassert itself in the second quarter of 2018.
Over the last six months, most countries have continued to register strong economic growth.
Consumption growth is anticipated to stay firm, supported by strong labour market conditions.
Exports are projected to continue to grow at a solid pace thereafter, consistent with the strengthening of private sector demand in the United States and the projected recovery in the global economy more broadly.
Some of the recent stronger-than-expected momentum in household spending is projected to persist, however, reflecting in part the effects of higher terms of trade.
The solid recovery in the US housing market, and in the economy more generally, could generate stronger growth in labour income.
Moreover, the fundamentals underpinning domestic demand remain favourable.
Household spending - especially on housing, motor vehicles, and furniture and appliances - rose strongly over the final six months of 1996.
In particular, building materials, fabricated metal and non-metallic mineral products have posted robust growth in recent months.
Strong Asian demand has helped maintain the prices of both metals and grains at high levels.
Growth in newly industrialized Asian economies advanced rapidly, with GDP growth in the region averaging 9.0 per cent in 2005, somewhat stronger than anticipated.
In addition, and perhaps most importantly, the US economy has continued to outperform expectations.
In contrast, non-energy commodity prices are expected to grow solidly over the next two years.
Economic growth in China has continued to surprise on the upside, and there are signs of overheating.
Japan registered a strong upturn in economic activity in the first half of 2013.
With a favourable outlook for the US economy and the prospect of moderate growth for the overseas economies, commodity prices are expected to remain firm.
Overseas, economic recovery is expected to remain relatively robust.
The favourable developments in Europe mainly reflect more robust household spending, buoyed by temporary government incentive programs for car purchases and substantial support from automatic stabilizers.
China's economy expanded by 9.9 per cent, boosted mainly by robust investment and exports.
In our view, the economy would have significant momentum well beyond this year, sustained by the significant amount of monetary easing that has already taken place.
The US economy began to recover in the third quarter of 2009, registering growth of 2.2 per cent.
This exceptional strength reflected robust growth in consumer spending, underpinned by favourable financial conditions and rising household employment and income.
The global economic expansion continues to strengthen and broaden across countries.
This stimulus is fuelling strong domestic demand growth.
Global growth is expected to be somewhat stronger over the 2011-12 period than was anticipated in the October Report.
The level of potential output in the fourth quarter of 2017 is estimated to have been 0.3 per cent higher than assumed in the January Report.
However, net exports are projected to contribute significantly to growth in economic activity, supported by robust demand in China and other trading partners.
Nevertheless, on average, the prices of other industrial commodities are expected to remain firm at high levels consistent with a solid pace of expansion among the major industrial countries.
Together with exports, business investment is nonetheless expected to continue to provide significant support to the US economic expansion over the projection horizon.
Overall, investment outside the resource sector is expected to strengthen.
Final domestic demand continued to show strong gains in the first half of 2005.
This robust growth is widespread across both household and business deposits.
Higher-than-expected oil prices would contribute to an improvement in Canada's terms of trade, providing a positive boost to wealth and household spending in Canada.
Further economic growth abroad, especially in the United States, should lead to increased demand for Canadian exports.
The pace of economic expansion picked up in the first half of 1997, largely as anticipated.
In light of these and other developments, funding conditions have improved for European banks.
A number of labour market factors helped raise consumer confidence, which contributed to the considerable boost in sales of housing and durable goods in the first half of 1999 and into the third quarter.
Monthly indicators suggest that the economy has picked up markedly in early 2006, led primarily by strong domestic demand.
Household spending continued to increase at a robust pace because of past monetary stimulus and stronger gains in real incomes.
Household spending also rose considerably, owing to monetary stimulus and ongoing gains in real incomes.
Economic growth is expected to strengthen thereafter, owing in part to a modest pickup in external demand.
Housing market activity has been very strong in some segments of the national market.
Overall, economic momentum in Canada is slightly firmer than the Bank had expected in January.
Strong growth in the global demand for oil, together with only modest increases in world production, has resulted in sharply higher oil prices.
During the past six months, the Canadian economy outperformed expectations.
Nonetheless, total export volumes should continue to register solid gains because of Canada's improved competitiveness.
Specifically, consumption will be supported by growing household net worth and a gradual increase in disposable income.
This dynamic is also expected to stimulate a more solid contribution from business fixed investment over time.
Among emerging markets, growth prospects for China and India are very favourable.
Canadian exports have also been stronger than anticipated, as a result of greater-than-expected growth in the United States.
Primarily because household expenditures are more robust than expected, growth is stronger in 2017 and 2018 than projected in April.
As well, the economic expansion in Japan appears to be building momentum.
Financial markets also continue to have a healthy appetite for the security offerings of Canadian corporations.
The global outlook has surprised on the upside and may continue to be stronger than predicted.
Increased activity in the US housing and automobile markets, together with continued strong demand for investment goods, helped stimulate demand for Canadian exports.
Thus, the level of activity at mid-year was slightly higher than anticipated.
Household credit continues to show solid growth.
Household spending has also recovered, supported by a pickup in consumer confidence.
The level of personal disposable income in the Bank's base-case projection is higher than in the April Report, largely reflecting historical revisions.
In the first half of the year, growth was very strong.
Strong motor vehicle sales, high consumer confidence, elevated single-family home construction, increased house resales and rising house prices suggest that underlying household spending growth remains robust.
Household expenditures (for both consumption and residential investment) have been stronger than was anticipated in July.
Growth prospects for these economies have been revised upward relative to the January Report, owing to stronger foreign demand, somewhat easier financial conditions and higher commodity prices, which benefit many commodity producers in this group.
Business investment is expected to regain momentum as growth in demand remains above growth in potential output.
Meanwhile, consumption growth has been strong, underpinned by robust consumer confidence and a strong labour market, with ongoing robust job gains over the past several years.
Expenditures on consumer durables and residential investment picked up strongly.
Conditional on the recovery progressing and confidence improving, US businesses are expected to increase hiring and boost spending on equipment and software.
On this news, US market rates rose further.
The acceleration has been particularly pronounced for exports of travel services.
Recent indicators suggest that the labour market has continued to improve gradually, in tandem with the turnaround in real GDP.
Optimism about prospective capital spending also continues to be fairly high.
Exports of non-energy commodities, such as lumber products, are also expected to strengthen.
A wide range of export sectors are expected to benefit from the continued strengthening of the US economy.
Household spending is also projected to grow at a healthy rate, although the pace of expansion will be moderated somewhat by the withdrawal of monetary stimulus.
As well, recent measures of business confidence have rebounded strongly.
In China and emerging Asia, growth remains strong.
Thus, the near-term outlook has improved substantially since the last Report.
Economic growth in Canada resumed in the third quarter of 2009 and is expected to have picked up further in the fourth quarter.
This projection implies that the estimated margin of unused capacity would be absorbed during this period, with growth at the upper end of the range moving the economy towards its production capacity at a faster rate.
But with robust domestic demand, some sectors - such as retail, wholesale, and housing - have been growing strongly.
A gradual recovery, initially supported by external demand, should then take hold.
If gasoline prices were to remain elevated relative to oil prices, total CPI inflation would also be higher than in the base case.
European growth has also been slightly stronger than anticipated.
The strength of housing demand in Ontario and British Columbia is contributing strongly to growth in residential mortgage credit.
For example, greater-than-anticipated foreign demand for Canadian exports could translate into increased business investment and net firm creation, which could result in higher productivity and potential output.
During 2004, with strengthening demand, Canada's economy is projected to grow somewhat above the economy's 3 per cent growth potential.
All these developments would contribute to stronger growth in potential.
More robust US activity, in turn, would generate positive spillovers to growth in the rest of the world and to commodity prices.
Global food and energy prices could also boost inflation more than projected in the base case.
The euro area, in particular, has been more resilient than anticipated, as illustrated by the strength in soft indicators, such as Purchasing Managers' Indexes and measures of economic sentiment.
The prices of non-energy commodities have risen further in recent months.
A large rebuilding of manufacturing inventories, following a drawdown in the previous quarter, also added significantly to growth.
Consistent with this, the largest cumulative gains in actual and planned capital spending for 2004 and 2005 occurred in commodity-producing industries in response to the substantial rebound in global commodity prices and the expectation that these price gains would persist for some time.
Growth in energy exports is expected to strengthen in 2014, reflecting announced plans by major producers to increase output, the growing use of Canadian heavy oil in US refineries and further growth in rail capacity.
Moreover, historical data show that an acceleration in the real value of M1 is typically followed by an increase in the rate of growth of real GDP.
The markets were receptive to new bond issuance, which has been strong since the last Report.
The strength in consumption in the fourth quarter was led by a surge in spending on durable goods, particularly on motor vehicles.
In the second quarter of 2018, housing activity is expected to pick up as resales start to recover.
The outlook for global economic growth in the second half of 2009 and through 2010 has strengthened since the July Report, particularly for China and smaller emerging economies in Asia.
Nonetheless, the Bank continues to expect modest growth in exports over the projection horizon, owing to the upward trajectory of US activity, the composition of which is still projected to shift in a relatively favourable manner for Canadian exporters.
There could be stronger-than-expected momentum in household expenditures in Canada.
Final sales picked up significantly in the first half of 1996, broadly in line with expectations.
Growth was driven by a boost to public investment and a pickup in consumption.
The global economy is regaining momentum.
Business investment continued to grow vigorously in the third quarter.
Unlike the situation in most other advanced economies, Canadian consumers can readily obtain credit, as evidenced by the continued brisk pace in its growth.
After levelling off during the first half of 1995, economic activity in Canada edged up somewhat in the second half.
Data on the US economy suggest that growth has been relatively strong.
Both gross and net issues by corporations have shown solid growth in Canada.
Growth in both short-term and long-term business credit remains solid.
Nevertheless, demand for Canadian exports is expected to grow solidly over the projection horizon, mainly underpinned by the continued recovery in the US housing market and robust growth in US business investment.
Fiscal incentives also helped to fuel renovation activity.
Since then, the situation in global financial markets has improved.
Firms surveyed for the Bank's latest Business Outlook Survey point to improvements in the US economic outlook and foreign orders and to the benefits of their recent investments in bolstering their ability to export.
Prices for many commodities have increased since the July Report.
Economic activity in other emerging-market economies is projected to pick up, owing to a normalization of financial conditions, more robust growth in foreign demand and further progress on economic reforms.
In the United States, financial conditions have remained highly stimulative.
Consumption growth should remain firm, sustained by gains in labour income.
With the assumed recovery in confidence and further improvement in financial conditions, investment spending should also pick up.
Data since the July Report also point to more momentum in economic activity than previously anticipated.
Solid domestic demand is anticipated to continue to support business investment.
These influences have been reflected in the more positive tone of many indicators of both consumer and housing activity early in the third quarter of 1996.
During the past six months, the outlook for the world economy and for Canada has become more positive.
Expectations of a pickup in business fixed investment in coming quarters are further supported by the return to a more positive balance of opinion about spending on machinery and equipment in the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey, by the acceleration in business credit, and by recent trends in industrial and commercial building permits.
Final domestic demand made even stronger gains in the second half of 2007 than in the first half.
In the past several months, it has become increasingly apparent that robust economic growth is resuming in North America.
A recovery in economic activity is also under way in Canada.
In Japan, fiscal and monetary stimulus is contributing to a rapid recovery in economic growth.
These developments have contributed to a recovery in business confidence and should prompt a pickup in business investment.
Others may choose instead to increase their spending on goods and services.
Natural gas prices are also up a little relative to January.
Exports also grew strongly, buttressed by further recovery from the impact of flooding in Thailand.
Labour market conditions have continued to improve.
The outlook for the global economy has continued to improve since the May Report.
Over time, they should also lead to higher capital spending and output by energy-producing firms.
Robust US activity would generate positive spillovers to growth in the rest of the world, particularly demand for Canada's non-energy exports.
National employment growth has remained firm over the past year, although it has been concentrated in part-time employment.
In Canada, the economic recovery is proceeding somewhat more rapidly than expected in the January Report, supported by continued fiscal and monetary stimulus, improved financial conditions, the rebound in global economic growth, more favourable terms of trade, and increased business and household confidence.
Investment outside the resource sector is expected to strengthen gradually, led by firms with improved export prospects.
Income gains from lower gasoline prices are being used either to boost current spending or to repay debt or increase savings, thus improving consumers' ability to spend in future years.
Monetary and fiscal stimulus is having positive effects.
In addition, exports of services continued to post positive growth in 2014.
Canada's economic growth in the first half of 2004 was higher than projected in the April Report.
During the past six months, the Canadian economy has continued to expand briskly, outstripping expectations.
While the Bank's latest base-case projection already incorporates a somewhat faster pickup in domestic demand than had been expected in the April Report, the recent rebound in consumer confidence, coupled with improvements in financial conditions, could lead to less precautionary saving, stronger growth, and an earlier return to the 2 per cent inflation target.
The financial situations and profitability of banks in Canada remain healthy - a positive sign for future credit conditions - and there is an abundance of liquidity.
The surge in world energy prices improved Canada's terms of trade (the price of exports relative to the price of imports) considerably in the second half of 2005.
A boost in investment resulted in faster-than-expected growth at the end of 2016, while recent data suggest a stronger-than-anticipated start to 2017.
This growth in the service sector has fuelled gains in employment, especially in positions that pay above-average wages.
In fact, government spending is expected to contribute positively to GDP growth in 2014 and beyond.
Over the past year, exports of services, driven by transportation services and travel services, have outperformed goods exports, and strong growth is projected to continue.
China and the other Asian newly industrialized economies continue to expand rapidly, and will continue to do so over the next few years.
The profile for global economic growth has improved since January.
Expenditures on pipeline infrastructure are also being markedly increased.
Underlying demographic demand and significantly improved affordability are expected to boost residential construction over the projection horizon.
Underpinned by a pickup in the US economy, exports are expected to continue recovering.
Growth has been supported by relatively solid exports and investment.
The main upside risks to inflation are that domestic and international developments will generate more demand for Canadian goods and services than is currently anticipated.
Meanwhile, in response to increased confidence and rising demand, business investment is growing more rapidly.
