While the decision to focus monetary policy on price stability is fundamental, and therefore long-term, judgments about what policy actions should be taken require regular reconsideration.
These judgments include an assessment of the economic factors affecting inflation, especially the strength of aggregate demand relative to aggregate supply.
However, two other points need to be stressed before these factors are examined.
First, in analysing aggregate measures of inflation it is important to distinguish between movements in the general level of prices and movements in relative prices.
Inflation exists when generalized increases in the prices of goods and services persist over time.
Price stability means just the opposite - over time there should be no persistent increase in the average price paid for goods and services.
Thus, both inflation and price stability are identified in terms of what is happening to the general, or average, level of prices.
This does not mean that prices of individual items will not change.
In both situations - generalized inflation or price stability - some prices go up relative to other prices and some go down.
It is these relative movements in individual prices that signal the need to move resources into or out of production.
Second, given the numerous factors and the lags involved in the inflation process, it is important to analyse more than one indicator of price change.
In addition to analysing movements of the CPI, attention should be given to aggregate measures of producer prices.
Prices that Canadian consumers pay and prices that Canadian producers receive can differ because not all Canadian-produced goods are consumed in Canada, and many goods consumed in Canada are produced elsewhere.
Exchange rate movements and changes in indirect taxes can also affect aggregate consumer and producer price measures differently.
Inflation, as measured by the 12-month rate of increase in the core CPI, has been consistently in the lower part of the inflation-control band since early 1993.
The target band falls gradually from a range of 1 1/2 to 3 1/2 per cent in mid-1994 to 1 to 3 per cent at the end of 1995.
While core inflation was relatively steady over the past year or so, the total CPI jumped sharply in February 1995 to 1.8 per cent, from close to zero over the previous twelve months.
The difference between core inflation and the total CPI in 1994 reflected the reduction of federal and provincial tobacco taxes early in the year.
These tax cuts lowered the level of the total CPI by an estimated 1.3 per cent.
The effect on the rate of inflation disappeared in February 1995.
In addition, a partial reversal of these earlier cuts just prior to the February federal budget and higher gasoline taxes announced in the budget are estimated to have raised the level of the CPI by almost 0.2 per cent.
Because of the one-time nature of these indirect tax effects, the Bank has not had to react in terms of its monetary policy operations.
If there had been evidence that these changes had affected underlying, or core, inflation, the Bank would have considered it necessary to respond.
For the balance of 1995, it appears that the year-over-year increase in the total CPI is likely to be somewhat higher than the core CPI because of higher food and energy prices.
In March, the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was 2.2 per cent, compared with the core rate of inflation as noted above of 2.1 per cent.
The CPI is the most important measure of inflation, but other broad measures of inflation also indicate that inflation has remained low.
The rate of increase of the gross domestic product deflator averaged 0.3 per cent during 1994.
The fixed-weight GDP deflator, which is another useful measure of underlying inflation, rose 1.5 per cent over the past year.
The most important factors affecting inflation in the last year have been the excess capacity in product markets and slack in the labour market.
As well, inflation expectations have diminished in response to the significant progress made towards price stability.
At the same time, certain categories of price movements have had a significant effect on aggregate consumer and producer price measures.
The two most important factors placing upward pressure on aggregate inflation measures have been commodity price increases and the effects on prices of the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar.
There have also been declines in individual prices that have exerted downward pressure on aggregate measures of inflation.
These have been most notable in the retail sector (as a result of heightened competition) and in computer prices.
The Canadian economy was considerably more buoyant during 1994 than had been expected at the start of the year, expanding by 5.6 per cent.
Exports, particularly of manufactured goods, led the expansion, which was more broadly based than in the previous year, as increased capacity utilization led to more investment and strong employment gains.
As well, higher commodity prices brought the resource sector back to pre-recession levels of activity.
The associated increase in full-time jobs led to strong growth in consumption in the second half of the year, but in recent months the effects of higher interest rates have become apparent in reduced sales of homes and motor vehicles.
With consumers spending less on big-ticket items, the pace of economic activity appears to have slowed in early 1995 compared with the second half of last year.
However, indicators of exports, imports, investment, and manufacturing shipments and orders point to continued solid expansion.
Based on the available information, and factoring in the impact of the rail strike, it appears that total output expanded by around 3 per cent in the first quarter.
Despite stronger activity during the past year, the Bank estimates that the Canadian economy still had excess capacity going into 1995, amounting to an output gap of about 2 1/2 per cent in the fourth quarter of 1994, down from 5 per cent a year earlier.
The effect of the depreciation of the Canadian dollar on prices is potentially large.
With the import content of the CPI estimated at about 20 per cent, the decline in the Canadian dollar over the past three years has had a significant impact.
This effect may have contributed as much as 1 percentage point to the rise in the CPI during the past year.
However, it appears that prices of a number of other imported, or import-competing, consumer goods have only partially reflected the effects of depreciation.
In most of these cases, increased competition in the retail and manufacturing sectors has resulted in downward pressure on prices.
For Canadians, who are both major producers and users of raw materials, these price increases have been felt in a number of different ways.
The rise in commodity prices has been widespread across products.
For Canadian producers the increases have been most pronounced in industrial materials.
These prices, which had fallen to very low levels during 1991-92, rebounded sharply as the recovery in the world economy gathered momentum.
Examples of large US dollar price rises during 1994 include pulp (69 per cent), newsprint (19 per cent), and base metals like nickel (60 per cent), copper (67 per cent) and aluminum (70 per cent).
The rise in the Canadian dollar prices received by Canadian commodity producers has been magnified by the depreciation of the Canadian dollar and has been reflected in the marked 9 per cent rise over the past year in the aggregate industrial product price index as well as in the sharp rise in aggregate export prices.
For domestic producers, these commodity price increases represent a significant rise in costs.
However, economy-wide there have been major offsetting factors working to contain total costs and thus aggregate prices.
Wages, the largest component of total costs, have risen very moderately.
Overall wage increases have fluctuated between 1 and 2 per cent during most of the past year.
New wage settlements have been running just above 1 per cent in the private sector and zero to negative in the public sector.
Another important factor in overall cost control has been productivity gains.
Since 1990 there has been considerable investment in new technology in Canada.
This restructuring effort resulted from a combination of events, including a major deterioration in Canadian competitiveness during 1987-90, increased global competition and the move to a low-inflation environment.
The returns to restructuring are now showing up in the aggregate productivity data, although it is still too early to determine the extent to which recent productivity growth exceeds that of a normal economic recovery.
The combination of rising productivity and moderate wage growth has led to steady declines in unit labour costs for more than a year.
As a result, the gap between the level of real wages and productivity that opened up in the early 1990s - a key factor in continuing efforts to hold labour costs down - has begun to close.
Finally, aggregate prices have been restrained by two other factors: lower housing prices and lower costs for machinery and equipment because of falling computer prices.
When monetary policy actions are taken in response to changing economic circumstances, the Bank uses the concept of monetary conditions to capture the influence of both short-term interest rates and the trade-weighted exchange rate on the economy.
While the Bank constantly reassesses the appropriate level of monetary conditions needed to achieve its inflation-control targets, its operations must sometimes give precedence to steadying nervous markets.
During the past year, financial market developments in Canada were strongly affected by nervousness and volatility in world financial markets, which began shortly after US authorities started to raise interest rates in early February 1994.
These external factors spilled over into Canada, where investors had already become increasingly concerned about the rising level of public debt and the political situation in Quebec.
Throughout the spring, the dollar weakened and short-term interest rates rose sharply, leaving overall monetary conditions in Canada significantly tighter than at the start of the year.
Around midyear the Bank established an operational target range of 50 basis points for the overnight interest rate - a move designed to enhance the effectiveness and transparency of its operations in volatile markets.
As markets stabilized during the summer months, the Bank lowered the range for overnight rates on three occasions, to encourage a decline in short-term rates.
These actions were intended to reverse only part of the earlier tightening in monetary conditions, given the strengthening trend in the economy.
In October and November, short-term interest rates began to move upwards again, led by further increases in US interest rates.
Initially, monetary conditions in Canada remained largely unchanged, as somewhat higher domestic interest rates were offset by a lower dollar.
The Bank of Canada raised its overnight target range once in November.
In early December, investors again became worried about the possibility of further tightening by the Federal Reserve and its implications for Canada.
In these circumstances, the Canadian dollar weakened further, short-term interest rates rose sharply and the Bank again adjusted its overnight target range upwards.
Monetary conditions tightened, reversing the easing that had occurred around midyear.
The Mexican currency crisis in late December added to the nervousness of international financial markets.
Downward pressure on the Canadian dollar intensified in early January 1995, and short-term interest rates came under sharp upward pressure.
Primarily to calm markets, the Bank raised its operational target range for the overnight rate five times between early January and late February.
These actions helped to steady the dollar, which in turn helped ease pressures on interest rates.
During the first quarter it also became increasingly apparent that the momentum in the economy was still stronger than expected and, with the degree of slack diminishing rapidly, some tightening in monetary conditions was warranted on that score.
By March, monetary conditions were about 1 1/2 percentage points tighter on average than in the second half of 1994 and some 2 percentage points tighter than a year earlier.
By mid-April, monetary conditions had tightened somewhat further because of a firming in the Canadian dollar.
In assessing the outlook for inflation, the Bank must consider various factors, including the implications of current monetary conditions for the future course of aggregate demand.
The most important element in Canada's external economic environment is the US economy, which grew by 4 per cent during 1994.
It is the Bank's view that the US economy is in a state of excess demand, although there is little evidence of increased inflationary pressures in broad measures of prices and production costs.
The Federal Reserve has raised short-term interest rates to avoid the buildup in inflationary pressures that could result if the economy continued to expand at a pace that maintains or adds to excess demand.
The Federal Reserve's actions appear to be slowing the rate of expansion to a more sustainable pace.
Output in the four major European countries, which rose by an estimated 3 per cent during 1994, may increase by a similar rate this year.
The situation in Japan is less certain, following the earthquake in early 1995 and the recent strength of the yen.
Nonetheless, it appears that output in Japan should be up this year, albeit at a modest rate.
Given a favourable outlook for the US and overseas economies, it is also expected that commodity prices will remain firm.
However, some prices have reached levels where it has become profitable to bring new sources of supply on stream.
Overall, external demand is expected to remain a strong positive factor for the Canadian economy.
In contrast, domestic demand is likely to be held back by the recent rise in interest rates and by general government restraint.
The implications of federal and provincial budgets for aggregate demand are an important consideration in the conduct of monetary policy.
Specifically, the magnitude and timing of fiscal policy actions affecting total demand in the economy must be considered in determining the appropriate path of monetary conditions.
In the case of the recent federal budget, the policies announced stretch out and build up over several years.
Consideration of all these factors suggests that total demand will continue to expand through 1995 and take up slack.
How much slack will remain at year-end is difficult to gauge, because of uncertainties in estimating both potential output and the strength of demand.
Recent private sector forecasts that have incorporated the effects of the February federal budget suggest that total demand will expand by 3 1/2 to 4 1/2 per cent in 1995.
Given more momentum than generally expected in the economy and the Bank's estimate of close to 3 per cent growth in potential output for 1995, a further significant closing of the output gap by year-end seems likely.
As noted earlier, the Bank's estimate of the output gap at the end of 1994 was 2 1/2 per cent.
This analysis indicates that the downward pressure that has been exerted on prices by excess capacity in product markets will persist through 1995, but to a lessening degree.
Similarly, labour market conditions will continue to moderate wage and cost pressures.
A major source of uncertainty for inflation is the effect of past exchange rate depreciation.
One, assuming that all the impact on prices from past depreciation has occurred and that there is no further depreciation, the effects on the 12-month rate of increase of the CPI from the decline in the Canadian dollar would begin to lessen during 1995.
Two, if demand conditions had delayed pass-through from the past depreciation, then the recent strengthening of demand could result in higher prices even in the absence of further depreciation.
In the context of this second possibility, the fact that the economy is now operating with significantly less slack reduces the likelihood of offsets through further cost reductions.
One possible offsetting factor could be still more competition and restructuring in the retail sector.
On balance, there would appear to be some risk that upward pressure from past exchange rate movements could result in the rate of increase in core CPI rising temporarily above the midpoint of the target band during 1995.
Expectations are also an important component in the outlook for inflation.
Eighty-nine per cent of respondents in the latest quarterly survey of Canadian business attitudes conducted by the Conference Board of Canada expected inflation to be in the 1 to 3 per cent range over the near term.
In the Conference Board's latest Quarterly Survey of Forecasters, it was expected that CPI inflation would be between 1 3/4 and 2 1/2 per cent for 1995, with an average of 2 per cent.
One measure that is sometimes used to calculate long-term inflation expectations is the difference between yields on government 30-year conventional and real return bonds.
On this basis, inflation over the long term is expected to be close to 4 per cent.
While this is down from 4 3/4 per cent in mid-1994, it is up from 3 1/4 per cent in mid-1993.
It is difficult, however, to know how accurately this measure captures true inflation expectations.
The market for real return bonds is small, and this measure also captures a premium for inflation uncertainty.
The monetary aggregates provide important information as indicators of near-term economic developments.
The most useful monetary aggregate for forecasting inflation one or two quarters ahead is the broad aggregate M2+.
Even allowing for the recent substitution of deposits into longer-term mutual funds, the Bank's indicator model for inflation using M2+ predicts core inflation of around 1 per cent or less for the next two quarters.
The rate of increase of real M1 (the narrow monetary aggregate, M1, deflated by prices) provides useful information on future output growth.
This indicator points to continued solid expansion of the economy, but at a rate below that recorded during 1994.
A low level of inflation for the past three years has resulted in a significant downward adjustment of inflation expectations in Canada.
This progress towards price stability is in turn providing an important underpinning for good economic performance.
Nonetheless, risks remain.
Over the near term, it appears that pressures from past exchange rate depreciation could move core CPI inflation into the upper half of the target band.
To the extent that these pressures materialize, the concern for monetary policy is that they be temporary in nature and not generate expectations of future inflation pressures.
Beyond the short term (through year-end 1995 and into 1996), the main concern is proper gauging of the speed and extent of closure in the output gap.
In the past, the momentum of the economy has often been underestimated at this point in the cycle.
When all of this is taken into account, the current outlook for inflation is consistent with the Bank's inflation-control targets.
Since the last Report, the Canadian economy has been weaker than expected, and the degree of slack in labour and product markets has been correspondingly greater.
Thus, the economic forces that work to reduce inflation have intensified over the past six months.
These circumstances prompted the Bank to take action to ease monetary conditions in the late spring and early summer.
However, monetary conditions subsequently tightened as the Bank was cautious in its actions to offset a strengthening Canadian dollar given the narrowing of short-term interest rate differentials with the United States at a time of political uncertainty.
Inflation is ultimately the product of excessive monetary expansion, but the transmission mechanism is long and complex.
It involves a series of linkages, leading from the Bank's responses to economic and financial developments to the rate of inflation.
Given the lags in the transmission mechanism, monetary policy must be conducted with an eye to the factors that are likely to influence inflation a year or two into the future.
Current rates of inflation cannot simply be projected forward.
In particular, the fundamental supply/demand factors that drive inflation must be distinguished from transitory factors.
It could prove counterproductive for policy to react to movements in inflation that are temporary and therefore inherently self-correcting.
The price disturbances that are of concern to the Bank are those that feed into expectations about future inflation and in turn lead to a higher, or lower, trend inflation rate than the policy objective.
Identifying these disturbances requires an examination of various measures of inflation and a coherent explanation for their behaviour over time.
Inflation, as measured by the 12-month rate of increase in the core CPI, has moved into the upper half of the target band over the last six months, as anticipated in the previous Report.
As of September 1995, core inflation was running at a 12-month rate of 2.6 per cent, compared with a high of 2.7 per cent reached in May.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was 2.3 per cent, down from a peak of 2.9 per cent in May.
Other broad measures of price inflation have also picked up in 1995.
The year-over-year rate of increase of the implicit gross domestic product deflator averaged 1.6 per cent in the first half of 1995, compared with an average rate of 0.6 per cent during 1994.
The fixed-weight GDP deflator, which adjusts for the effects of changes in the composition of spending, rose 2.6 per cent on average during the first half of 1995 on a year-over-year basis, up from around 1 1/2 per cent at the end of 1994.
Excess capacity in product markets and slack in labour markets have continued to place downward pressure on inflation over the past six months.
At the same time, movements in certain key relative prices have again substantially affected measures of aggregate consumer and producer prices.
Specifically, the upward pressure on the overall price level arising from both commodity-price increases and past depreciation of the Canadian dollar has been particularly evident over the past six months.
After expanding rapidly during 1994, economic activity in Canada levelled off during the first half of 1995.
Although a slowdown had been anticipated, the Bank was surprised (along with most others) by how abruptly the situation changed.
Three factors appear to have accounted for the weakness.
First, households cut back spending on big-ticket and discretionary items.
Second, net exports declined after contributing very substantially to growth during 1994.
Third, reductions in government spending began to have a noticeable impact on aggregate demand in the second quarter.
A number of factors contributed to reduced consumer spending on housing and automobiles.
A key influence appears to have been the sharp rise in interest rates that took place during the winter.
In addition, consumer attitudes were negatively affected by a flat employment picture, as moderate increases in employment in the manufacturing and service sectors were offset by declines in construction and in the public sector.
As well, exports fell, mainly as a result of a slowdown in the US economy.
Although some slowing in US activity had been anticipated in response to the rise in interest rates that had occurred over the previous year, the reaction there, too, was greater and more sudden than expected.
Other factors contributing to the US slowdown were the very sharp decline in demand in Mexico and weakness in Japan and Canada.
In the United States, and especially in Canada, the extent of the weakening in final domestic demand was unexpected.
Consequently, there was substantial inventory accumulation in both economies during the first quarter, and activity during the second and third quarters was held back by the need to work off those excess stocks.
However, both economies are showing signs of renewed activity in the housing and automobile markets, suggesting that domestic demand is responding to the decline in interest rates that has taken place since last spring.
Lack of growth in aggregate demand in the first half of 1995 has led to an increase in excess capacity.
It is especially difficult to measure potential output in these circumstances because growth in capacity can slow in response to increased uncertainty about future demand.
However, the Bank estimates that the output gap widened to between 3 and 3 1/2 per cent at midyear, compared with between 2 and 2 1/2 per cent at the end of 1994.
Accordingly, the downward pressure on trend inflation has clearly increased during the past six months.
Much of this adjustment usually takes place during the first year following a change in the exchange rate, but the total effect can take two years or more to emerge.
At the recent peak in inflation in May, this effect is estimated to have accounted for over 1 percentage point of the 2.7 per cent year-over-year measured increase in core CPI.
The clearest example of the exchange rate effect can once again be seen in motor vehicles, where the average price is up approximately 6 per cent from a year ago.
In the cases of many other imported, or import-competing, consumer goods, the usual exchange rate effects appear to have been largely offset by increased competition and improved productivity in both the retail and the manufacturing sectors.
World commodity prices (quoted in US dollars) have continued to rise over the past six months.
In Canada, these price increases have been felt in various ways by both producers and users of raw materials.
For Canadian producers, price increases have been most pronounced for newsprint, pulp and grains.
Newsprint and pulp prices have surged as world demand continues to grow in the face of limited prospects for additional supply.
Grain prices have jumped as a result of adverse growing conditions in the United States and in other foreign grain producing regions.
Prices for base metals have also resumed their advance, after experiencing a downward correction in the spring.
The rise in average prices received by Canadian commodity producers continued to be reflected in the aggregate industrial product price index , as well as in a further marked rise in aggregate export prices.
Nevertheless, the 7 per cent rise in the IPPI over the past year represents a substantial deceleration from the rates observed in early 1995.
The impact of commodity-price increases, evident for some time in producer prices, is now beginning to show up clearly in selected consumer prices.
Indeed, it is estimated that higher commodity prices have contributed about half a percentage point to the recent year-over-year measures of CPI inflation.
This effect should prove temporary, both because commodity prices should stabilize in the face of the current moderation in the pace of world economic expansion and because excess supply here in Canada should place downward pressure on trend inflation.
The clearest examples of commodity-price effects on the CPI can be seen in the substantial price increases for both paper supplies and reading materials.
However, the rises in the costs of metals, chemicals and packaging materials imply that these effects are being felt more widely.
Increased prices of commodities and of imported inputs have significantly raised costs for domestic producers.
Combined with weakening domestic demand in the first half of the year, this has increased the incentive for producers to control other costs and to try to raise productivity.
Wages, the largest component of total costs, continued to rise at a very moderate pace during the first half of 1995, with wage settlements averaging about 1.5 per cent in the private sector and just above zero in the public sector.
This represents something of an acceleration over last year for the private sector, but wage increases have followed substantial productivity gains in many areas.
More generally, aggregate employment levels and the unemployment rate have remained almost unchanged over the last six months.
With this persistent slack in the labour market, average wage growth is likely to remain modest.
Gains in productivity (output per person-hour) were particularly impressive during 1994, as firms restructured their operations and as the economic expansion gained strength (Parker 1995).
With wages advancing only modestly, profitability improved significantly in many sectors.
However, with the sudden slowdown in activity early in 1995, both labour productivity and profits levelled off over the first half of the year.
This is not an uncommon cyclical phenomenon, as firms tend to adjust labour inputs gradually to a sudden easing of demand, especially when it is widely believed to be temporary.
This combination of some wage growth and weaker aggregate productivity has caused unit labour costs to rise recently.
However, it is expected that a resumption of the expansion later in the year will raise productivity further and that the effects of ongoing restructuring efforts will continue to emerge over time, thus helping to keep overall cost increases low.
The gap between real wages and productivity continued to close in the first half of 1995.
This was mainly a result of the further increases in world commodity prices discussed above, which reduced producer wages in real terms for firms in affected sectors.
This development should lead to some increase in employment growth in the coming quarters.
Aggregate price rises have also been restrained by lower housing prices, as higher interest rates early in the year caused many households to delay home purchases.
Early signs of revival in the housing market suggest that this factor may also be temporary.
As explained in the previous Report, the Bank uses the concept of monetary conditions to guide its policy actions in response to changing economic circumstances.
Monetary conditions capture the influence of both short-term interest rates and the trade-weighted exchange rate on the economy, and the monetary conditions index constructed by the Bank provides a shorthand measure of the overall degree of tightness or ease of such conditions.
The Bank constantly reassesses the level of monetary conditions necessary to achieve its inflation-control targets.
If, on balance, the analysis indicates a lessening of inflationary pressures relative to what had been expected (for example, because of lower-than-expected aggregate demand), the desired path for monetary conditions is revised downwards.
However, if inflation pressures have increased relative to earlier expectations, then desired monetary conditions are adjusted upwards.
It is important to bear in mind that occasions arise when the Bank's actions cannot be devoted exclusively to achieving the desired monetary conditions in the short term because of the need to cope temporarily with actual or potential disorderly markets.
Towards the end of 1994 and in early 1995, higher US interest rates and increasing concerns about the high levels of public debt put downward pressure on the exchange rate and upward pressure on market interest rates.
The Bank responded with successive upward adjustments to its overnight target range, and monetary conditions tightened.
Even though the Bank acted primarily to calm markets, a tightening of monetary conditions was also judged appropriate at the time because there was evidence of stronger-than-expected momentum in the economy.
Subsequently, the positive reaction to the February 1995 federal budget provided a steadying influence in financial markets, and monetary conditions at the end of the first quarter were essentially unchanged from mid-January.
In the second quarter of 1995, the tone of Canadian financial markets improved, and the Canadian dollar strengthened.
This reflected increasingly positive assessments of the fiscal situation for the provinces and for the federal government as well as heightened expectations of future declines in interest rates in the United States in response to the slowing of the US economy.
In early May, the improved market tone allowed the Bank to rebalance the mix of monetary conditions by offsetting the effect of the stronger exchange rate through a reduction of 25 basis points in its target range for the overnight interest rate.
It became increasingly apparent throughout the rest of the second quarter that the Canadian economy had not been expanding as expected, thus warranting an easing of monetary conditions.
The range for the overnight rate was lowered by 25 basis points on two occasions in early June, ratifying reductions in money market rates that had already taken place.
The decline in interest rates, combined with a somewhat lower Canadian dollar, contributed to a significant easing of monetary conditions.
At the same time, the Canadian dollar was benefiting from a further improvement in our terms of trade.
There was also a growing awareness that fiscal adjustment is proceeding and that Canada's inflation performance remains favourable.
In response to the firming of the dollar, there was a decline in short-term interest rates, which the Bank undertook to ratify.
This action by the Bank involved reducing its operating range for the overnight rate by 25 basis points on four occasions (on 6 and 10 July and on 9 and 28 August) to a range of 6 to 6 1/2 per cent.
In taking these actions, the Bank proceeded cautiously because of the potential implications for the dollar of the narrowing Canada-US short-term interest rate spreads at a time of impending political uncertainty.
Indeed, the continuing wide long-term spreads suggested that financial markets remained sensitive to debt levels and to uncertainty regarding the Quebec referendum.
While overall market developments during this period moved towards a further rebalancing of monetary conditions, the net outcome was a tightening in monetary conditions as the declines in interest rates did not completely offset the currency appreciation.
In September, following the setting of the referendum date, volatility increased in money and foreign exchange markets.
The Bank remained cautious and maintained its overnight rate unchanged at 6 to 6 1/2 per cent up to the 20 October cut-off date for information contained in this Report.
In assessing the outlook for inflation, the Bank must consider various factors, including the external economic environment, the momentum of the Canadian economy and the implications of monetary conditions for the future course of aggregate demand.
The single most important element in Canada's external environment is the US economy, as was clearly demonstrated during the first half of 1995 when activity in that country slowed.
That slowdown appears to have brought aggregate demand and supply in the US economy to a position of rough balance, paving the way for a more sustained period of low-inflation growth.
Consequently, the US economy appears to have solid underlying momentum in the second half of the year, and some pickup in growth can be expected as inventory adjustment is completed.
Overseas, the expansion is expected to continue but at a slower pace than previously forecast.
It now appears that growth in Europe in 1995 will be similar to that experienced in 1994.
The situation in Japan is more uncertain, given financial system stresses and the strength of the yen earlier this year.
Nonetheless, with recent declines in interest rates, a weaker yen and several other policy initiatives, it seems likely that output in Japan will be up this year, albeit only modestly.
Despite Canada's diversified industrial base, commodities continue to contribute strongly to economic activity.
Overall, then, the positive contribution of external demand to the expansion of the Canadian economy is expected to resume in the second half of 1995.
Renewed expansion in the export-oriented sector can be expected to generate further growth in employment and income.
As unemployed individuals regain employment they usually provide a strong impetus to overall consumption, as was the case in late 1994.
The decline in interest rates since last spring should also continue to stimulate demand.
But at the same time, many households remain nervous about job prospects in an environment of continuing restructuring and restraint, which is affecting all sectors of the economy.
Indeed, in the case of the public sector, restructuring and downsizing is expected to be a persistent characteristic of the economic outlook for the next couple of years, given the need to improve public finances.
Moreover, the adjustment of inventories back to desired levels will continue to moderate production in the near term, although to a diminishing extent.
Consideration of both external and domestic factors suggests that economic activity should show renewed growth towards year-end, with a modest pickup in the third quarter followed by a more robust fourth quarter.
Recent private sector forecasts suggest that total demand (in volume terms) will expand by about 2 per cent in 1995.
In light of the absence of growth during the first half of the year, these forecasts also imply some rebound in the second half.
However, the profile of activity for the third and fourth quarters will likely mean that by year-end the output gap will not be much different than it was in mid-1995.
This indicates that the downward pressure on trend inflation coming from slack in product markets will remain a significant factor.
Similarly, conditions in the labour market will continue to contain wage and cost pressures.
The implications that past exchange rate movements have for consumer prices remain a source of uncertainty.
Although it is difficult to quantify these effects precisely, it is the Bank's judgment that some of the recent rises in the CPI represented previously postponed adjustments to past depreciations and that we are at about the peak in terms of the potential inflationary consequences of exchange rate pass-through.
Although there is still some scope for further adjustment once the recovery regains its vigour, it seems likely that increased competition at the retail level as well as restructuring efforts have erased some of those exchange rate effects permanently.
Combined with recent currency appreciation, this means that by early 1996 there should be significantly less impetus to measured inflation coming from this source.
In contrast, the rises in raw materials prices that were seen in 1994, and which have continued into this year, have only recently begun to find their way into consumer prices, particularly prices for metal and paper products.
Innovations in the use of these inputs and ongoing attempts to increase productivity in general make it difficult to predict how these movements will ultimately affect consumer prices.
Nevertheless, this phenomenon points to a risk that the rate of increase in the core CPI, although declining on balance, might remain in the upper half of the target band for the next several months.
This would be especially likely if commodity prices were to rise further.
However, the fact that the economy is operating with more slack than was the case six months ago has increased the likelihood of offsets through further cost reductions.
Anecdotal evidence also suggests that the Canadian retail marketplace continues to be very resistant to price increases.
Expectations are also an important component in the outlook for inflation, partly because they are the means whereby relative price increases, coming from the exchange rate or commodity-price effects mentioned above, can be transformed into an increase in the trend of inflation.
Short-term inflation expectations appear to have edged up in response to observed price increases, although they remain within the Bank's inflation-control target band.
In its October Quarterly Survey of Canadian Business Attitudes, the Conference Board of Canada reported that 28 per cent of respondents expected inflation to be 3 per cent over the near term, compared with only 17 per cent in the first-quarter survey, while nearly 72 per cent of respondents still expected inflation to be 2 per cent or less.
In its September Quarterly Survey of Forecasters, the Conference Board noted that CPI inflation was expected to average just under 2.5 per cent in both 1995 and 1996, up from about 2 per cent in the previous survey.
The difference between yields on government 30-year conventional and Real Return Bonds can be used to calculate long-term inflation expectations.
Since this measure also reflects premiums for inflation uncertainty and the relative liquidity of the two markets, it is difficult to know how much emphasis to give to its level.
It is likely, however, that changes in this differential largely reflect changes in inflation expectations.
On this basis, it would appear that long-term inflation expectations have been falling throughout 1995.
The monetary aggregates are also important indicators of near-term inflation and of the growth in real output.
The most useful monetary aggregates for forecasting inflation for the period immediately ahead are the broad aggregates associated with M2+ (e.g., M2+ adjusted for substitution into and out of non-money-market mutual funds and Canada Savings Bonds), whose trend growth rates often indicate where inflation is heading.
Growth in these aggregates has been moderate, suggesting that the upward movement in measured inflation observed in the first part of 1995 will not be sustained.
Specifically, M2+ and adjusted M2+ have been growing at a 3 to 5 per cent rate, which is consistent with a trend inflation rate of under 2 per cent.
The rate of change of M1 can provide useful information about where real output growth is headed within an economic cycle.
Although the relationship is not exact, a clearly discernible correlation is evident in Chart 14 where growth in M1 precedes growth in real GDP.
M1 growth was weak in the latter part of 1994 and in the early part of 1995, anticipating the slowdown in real GDP growth experienced through the first part of the year.
More recently, M1 growth has accelerated.
This suggests a resumption of economic expansion in the second half of 1995, even allowing for a possible upward bias in M1 growth coming from particular factors affecting the corporate-demand-deposits component.
As anticipated at the time of the last Report, adjustment to past exchange rate depreciation has pushed measured inflation into the upper half of the inflation-control band.
This effect is expected to have diminished significantly by mid-1996.
However, the pass-through of cost increases stemming from higher world prices for raw materials is likely to be a temporary source of further upward pressure on the CPI in the near term.
The last six months have also witnessed an unanticipated increase in excess supply in the Canadian economy.
This added degree of downward pressure on trend inflation means that underlying fundamentals are pointing even more strongly to a downward movement in core inflation.
Accordingly, while exchange rate and commodity-price effects will likely hold inflation in the upper half of the Bank's target range for several more months, the trend rate of inflation is expected to decline into the lower half of the inflation-control band in 1996.
The near-term inflation outlook, therefore, remains consistent with the Bank's inflation-control targets.
For the medium term, the lessening of inflation pressures would imply a reduction in the desired path of monetary conditions, unless the economy began to show a much stronger rate of expansion.
Downward pressure on inflation over the last six months has warranted an easing in monetary conditions, which the Bank encouraged through reductions in its operating band for overnight interest rates.
These actions have been taken against a favourable backdrop of improving financial market sentiment that reflects both progress on the fiscal front domestically and global reductions in short-term interest rates.
The Bank has nevertheless proceeded at a measured pace in its policy actions, given that short-term interest rate differentials against the United States were narrowing and have recently turned negative.
Moreover, financial markets remain wary about the high public sector debt levels in Canada and about the political situation in Quebec.
Over time, inflation results from excessive monetary expansion, although the lags between money supply growth and inflation can be long and difficult to predict.
The monetary transmission mechanism involves a series of relationships, beginning with the Bank's influence on overnight interest rates and ending with the ultimate impact on inflation.
Through its actions, the Bank promotes a rate of monetary expansion consistent with its inflation-control target range, which in turn should foster sustained economic expansion.
Monetary policy actions must thus be forward-looking, focussing on the factors that will influence the trend of inflation six to eight quarters into the future.
Developments in inflation over the past year have clearly illustrated the need to distinguish between fundamental supply/demand factors that drive inflation over time and transitory factors that do not have a permanent effect.
Measures of inflation rose through the first half of 1995 as a result of both exchange rate and commodity price effects on consumer prices.
However, as predicted in earlier issues of this Report, these transitory disturbances have had little effect on the trend of inflation.
Thus, as these effects have diminished, measured inflation has fallen back and the excess supply situation in the economy has again become the primary factor affecting the rate of inflation.
As anticipated in the last Report, the 12-month rate of increase in the core CPI has recently moved into the lower half of the target range.
However, the speed at which inflation has declined was somewhat faster than expected, partly as a result of discounting by retailers in response to weak consumer demand.
As of March 1996, core inflation was down to a 12-month rate of 1.5 per cent, compared with a high of 2.7 per cent reached in May 1995.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was 1.4 per cent, down from a peak of 2.9 per cent in May 1995.
Other broad measures of price inflation also fell back in the second half of 1995.
The rate of increase in the fixed-weight GDP deflator was 2.2 per cent in the fourth quarter of 1995 on a year-over-year basis, compared with 2.7 per cent in the second quarter of 1995.
The year-over-year rate of increase of the chain price index for GDP excluding inventories - a measure of price changes that adjusts for shifts in the composition of spending - also declined over the same period.
Excess capacity in product markets and slack in labour markets continued to place downward pressure on inflation over the past six months.
At the same time, the upward pressure on the inflation rate from both commodity price increases and the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar lessened.
Although the last Report suggested that only a modest pickup in growth could be expected in the third quarter, the anticipated further strengthening towards year-end did not materialize.
One factor contributing to this outcome was a further weakening in economic confidence among households, which resulted in households reducing their spending in spite of significantly lower interest rates.
Activity in the second half of 1995 was also held back by a substantial reduction in inventory accumulation following the buildup of stocks in the first half of the year.
On balance, after several years of strong growth, business fixed investment showed little change over this period.
In marked contrast to declining domestic demand in the second half of 1995, exports increased sharply as growth in the US economy picked up.
Export demand might have been even higher had it not been for sluggish growth in overseas economies and some temporary weakness in the US economy towards year-end.
The slow growth in aggregate demand in the second half of 1995 has led to an increase in excess capacity, implying increased downward pressure on the trend of inflation.
However, there is evidence that aggregate supply in recent years has been lower than previously estimated because of a reduction in the trend rate of labour force participation.
This has led the Bank to lower its estimate of the level of potential output by about 1 per cent since the last Report.
The Bank now estimates that the output gap widened to between 2 1/2 and 3 per cent at year-end, up from between 2 and 2 1/2 per cent at midyear.
Given the weight of imported goods in the average consumer basket in Canada, exchange rate movements typically feed through to core CPI by a factor of about one-fifth.
Most of this adjustment normally takes place within two years after a change in the exchange rate.
Accordingly, the impact on inflation of the major depreciation of the Canadian dollar (which was largely over by mid-1994) has diminished appreciably over the last six months.
At the recent peak in measured inflation in May 1995, this effect was estimated to have accounted for over 1 percentage point of the core inflation rate of 2.7 per cent.
This exchange rate effect is estimated to have fallen to about 0.5 percentage points in March 1996.
The decline in this effect has been clearly evident in the prices of motor vehicles, where the year-over-year rate of increase in Canada over that in the United States fell from 2.9 percentage points in January 1995 to 2.1 percentage points in February 1996.
Increased competition and the effects of past improvements in productivity in both the retail and the manufacturing sectors have also put downward pressure on the prices of various imported and import-competing goods in recent months.
World commodity prices (quoted in US dollars) have on average remained at relatively high levels since last October.
Price increases have been most pronounced for natural gas, crude oil, grains and lumber.
Both natural gas and crude oil prices have risen considerably following colder-than-normal weather in much of North America and Europe.
Crude oil prices have also been under considerable upward pressure because a resumption of petroleum sales by Iraq is unlikely in the near term.
Lumber prices have recovered following improvements in the US housing market and in anticipation of an agreement to tax Canadian exports to the United States if they exceed prescribed limits.
Grain prices have continued to increase as a result of firm world demand and adverse growing conditions in the United States.
In contrast, the prices of most industrial materials have fallen because of weakening demand (given only moderate world output growth as well as efforts by users to reduce stocks) and substantial increases in supplies.
Declines have been most pronounced in the case of pulp, where prices have fallen by more than 50 per cent from the peak in late 1995.
The impact of past commodity price increases continues to show up in selected consumer prices, with the clearest examples being the substantial price increases for both paper supplies and reading materials.
However, here again, the impact on core inflation appears to be decreasing from a peak of about half a percentage point observed in the fall of 1995.
A combination of sluggish demand in the second half of 1995 and fiercely competitive markets has maintained the pressure on producers to control costs and to raise productivity.
Overall, cost increases have been low.
Wages, the largest component of total costs, continued to rise at a very moderate pace during 1995, with wage settlements averaging 1.4 per cent in the private sector and 0.6 per cent in the public sector.
For the private sector, this represented a slight increase over the average in 1994, but in many cases wage increases have followed earlier substantial productivity gains.
The unemployment rate has remained almost unchanged over the past six months, as encouraging gains in aggregate employment levels have been matched by similar increases in the labour force.
Productivity (output per person-hour) was virtually unchanged last year, after impressive gains in 1993 and 1994.
The lack of growth in productivity in the second half of 1995 resulted partly from the largely unanticipated slowing in demand towards year-end, since firms tend not to adjust their labour inputs fully to adverse demand shocks in the short run.
This combination of some wage gains and little change in aggregate productivity caused unit labour costs to rise in the second half of 1995.
The gap between real wages and productivity opened up slightly in the second half of 1995.
This reflected a combination of moderate rises in wage rates, lower increases in producer prices and the lacklustre performance of labour productivity.
The larger gap will encourage continued cost-containment measures, especially in the retail sector where the gap is most pronounced.
Monetary policy is aimed at keeping inflation within the 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control target range.
In light of the accumulating evidence that the trend of inflation was moving into the lower half of the range, the Bank reduced the operating band for the overnight interest rate by one-quarter of a percentage point on six occasions since the last Report in order to ease monetary conditions.
The first move (31 October) was the day after the Quebec referendum, as the Bank took the earliest opportunity following this period of heightened market uncertainty to react to the disinflationary pressure.
Two of the cuts (on 19 December and 31 January) took advantage of reductions in the US federal funds rate, two others (on 25 January and 21 March) followed reports indicating that inflation had moved firmly into the lower half of the target range, while the most recent cut (18 April) occurred in the context of reductions in official rates by a number of central banks in Europe.
Over this period, money market interest rates declined broadly in line with the overnight rate as financial markets reacted positively to the Bank's actions.
Canada's solid inflation performance and the pronounced progress that has been made towards achieving stated fiscal policy objectives, as well as declining short-term interest rates globally, all contributed to this improved sentiment in the money market.
Indeed, Canada-US short-term interest rate differentials narrowed over this period and are now negative.
The firmness of the dollar appears to reflect the same factors that are supporting the money market, as well as the recent marked improvement in the current account of Canada's balance of international payments.
The decline in short-term interest rates has been reflected in the Bank's monetary conditions index - a shorthand measure of the combined effect of changes in short-term interest rates and the exchange rate on aggregate demand.
Since last autumn, monetary conditions have eased by the equivalent of about 200 basis points, attaining the lowest level in two years.
With many central banks cutting short-term interest rates, the international environment has provided a favourable backdrop for domestic rate reductions.
Moreover, the reasons for easier monetary conditions in Canada seemed clear to market participants and, in most cases, the reduction in the overnight rate was anticipated by them and already factored into money market rates.
The Bank, nevertheless, proceeded at a measured pace in lowering the operating band for the overnight rate.
By doing so, it hoped to foster as much understanding and as little uncertainty as possible about its policy actions at a time of narrowing short-term interest rate spreads and ongoing financial market attention to the high levels of government indebtedness and the political situation in Quebec.
At times in the past when there was significant financial market uncertainty, monetary policy actions aimed at easier monetary conditions provoked a sharp drop in the value of the Canadian dollar that set up expectations of further depreciation.
This led to heavy selling of Canadian dollar assets and thus to sharp increases in interest rates - sometimes when lower rates would have been appropriate given the prevailing economic conditions.
The measured approach to lowering overnight rates during the last six months appears to have helped minimize uncertainty, thereby facilitating the easing in monetary conditions.
The premiums that medium- and long-term borrowers of Canadian dollars have had to pay relative to borrowers of US dollars have begun to decline but remain relatively high, indicating that investor uncertainty has not disappeared.
For example, the differential between Canadian and US long-term yields has fallen below 1 1/2 per cent.
This is down from the peak of 2 per cent prior to the Quebec referendum, but still significantly above the average of about 1 per cent during the 1970s and 1980s - a period when the differential incorporated a higher inflation rate in Canada than in the United States.
In assessing the outlook for inflation, the Bank must consider the implications of various factors - including the external economic environment, consumer and business confidence and monetary conditions - for the future course of aggregate demand.
It also looks at information on measures of inflationary expectations and at the pace of monetary expansion to shed light on the future path of output and inflation.
The most important element in Canada's external economic environment is the US economy, which grew by 1.3 per cent during 1995.
The year-end weakness in the US economy continued in the early part of 1996 as a result of a series of federal government shutdowns and adverse weather conditions.
However, as these temporary factors have disappeared and as domestic demand responds to the easing in short-term interest rates, the US economy appears to be returning to a path of steady growth.
While economic expansion in the major European countries slowed during 1995, the Japanese economy began to show signs of renewed strength towards year-end.
A general firming trend is anticipated among the major overseas countries during 1996, sustained in many cases by an easing in monetary conditions.
In addition, continued expansion in the emerging markets of Southeast Asia is expected, as is a recovery in Latin America.
With further increases in supplies and ongoing reductions in stocks by users, prices for pulp and paper may continue to decline over the near term.
The prices of both crude oil and natural gas should fall back as weather conditions moderate.
The positive contribution of external demand to the expansion of the Canadian economy should continue in the first half of 1996.
This will be reinforced by the strong competitive position of Canadian industry, which favours both export growth and further substitution of domestic production for imports.
Domestic demand is also expected to begin to strengthen, but only gradually.
With many households concerned about both job prospects and their financial situations, expenditures on big-ticket items will likely remain relatively modest over the near term.
In addition, fiscal restraint will continue to affect aggregate demand directly.
Ongoing inventory correction could also restrain the pace of activity, although to a lessening extent, and business investment intentions point to some softness after several years of rapid growth.
Nonetheless, there are signs of a gathering momentum in domestic demand.
Recent growth in employment and income, stemming partly from the expansion of net exports, should encourage household spending.
The significant easing in monetary conditions since last spring should also begin to improve confidence and provide an important boost to domestic demand.
Indeed, data on retail sales and sales of existing homes for the early part of the first quarter indicate that a recovery in household spending is under way.
And with fiscal consolidation proceeding at all levels of government, risk premiums in interest rates along the yield curve have begun to decline and individuals have become less concerned about the possibilities of future tax increases.
All told, external and domestic factors suggest that economic activity will expand faster in the first half of 1996 than in 1995.
However, the factors at work also suggest that slack in the economy will not be taken up in any significant way until the second half of the year.
These forecasts suggest that total demand (in volume terms) will expand by slightly under 2 per cent on an annual average basis in 1996, with a profile pointing to a strengthening in the pace of activity to around 3 per cent at annual rates in the second half of the year.
This analysis suggests that the downward pressure on the trend of inflation coming from excess supply will persist through the year.
Similarly, labour market conditions will continue to contain wage pressures.
It is also expected that stronger economic expansion this year will lead to renewed productivity growth, which will help keep overall cost increases low.
The pressure on core inflation from past depreciations and earlier commodity price increases should continue to abate over the next few months.
Stabilization in the value of the Canadian dollar over the past year, together with recent declines in the prices of many industrial materials (especially pulp), is easing the pressure on core inflation from these sources.
Furthermore, anecdotal evidence continues to suggest that competition in the Canadian retail marketplace remains intense, with strong consumer resistance to price increases.
Part of the decline in core inflation observed since November 1995 may have represented temporary discounting by retailers in an effort to clear unwanted stocks, especially seasonal items.
Once retail inventories return to more normal levels, and to the extent that household demand starts to gather some strength, some of the recent reduction in core inflation that came from this discounting may be reversed.
On balance, the upward pressure on core inflation from transitory factors should continue to ease in coming months.
The formation of expectations can play an important role in the dynamics of inflation.
For example, changes in the exchange rate or in commodity prices, instead of just affecting the price level, can influence the trend of inflation through their impact on expectations.
Over the past year, however, such relative price movements seem to have affected core inflation only temporarily, and short-term inflation expectations have subsequently begun to fall back.
In the December quarterly survey of Canadian business confidence conducted by the Conference Board, 83 per cent of respondents expected inflation to be 2 per cent or less over the near term, compared with 72 per cent in the previous survey.
In the Conference Board's March quarterly Survey of Forecasters, it was anticipated that CPI inflation would average about 1.6 per cent in 1996, down from just under 2.5 per cent six months ago, and would edge up to just under 2.0 per cent in 1997.
Longer-term inflation expectations reported in the surveys have also fallen into line with the midpoint of the inflation-control target range, indicating the growing credibility of monetary policy.
Long-term inflation expectations can also be gauged by looking at the yield differential between long-term conventional (or nominal) and Real Return Government of Canada bonds.
While this differential is affected by a number of factors other than inflation expectations, the influence of these other factors probably changes slowly.
Moreover, in contrast to survey data, this measure of expectations is available continuously and reflects actual financial decisions based on forecasts of inflation by market participants.
The differential rose to a peak of about 4.6 per cent in mid-1994 and has come down since that date somewhat more rapidly than the longer-term forecasts of inflation.
It currently stands at about 3 1/4 per cent - close to its lowest level since Real Return Bonds were first issued in 1991.
Monetary aggregates have been useful indicators of near-term output and price-level developments.
For inflation, the broad aggregate M2+ (especially when adjusted for substitution into longer-term mutual funds) has been the best indicator.
It has been growing at between 3 and 5 per cent annually for some time, which is consistent with inflation remaining in the bottom half of the target range.
The most valuable indicator of near-term changes in output has been real M1.
This narrow aggregate, which measures the real value of transactions balances in the economy, grew quite rapidly throughout 1995.
Some of this reflects rising deposits in current accounts in response to the more competitive interest rates paid on some of these accounts.
However, even after allowing for this technical factor, the expansion of real M1 appears consistent with a pickup in GDP growth in the first half of 1996.
Recent work at the Bank has identified a statistical model in which M1 provides leading information about the medium-term trend of inflation.
This model suggests that inflation will average under 2 per cent per annum over the next couple of years.
As anticipated six months ago in the last Report, the effects of past exchange rate and commodity price movements on inflation have begun to wane.
Thus, both total and core CPI inflation have moved into the lower half of the inflation-control target range.
This movement occurred somewhat earlier than expected, partly as a result of price discounting by retailers in response to weak consumer demand.
With a significant amount of excess supply in the Canadian economy, the outlook for the balance of 1996 is for the core rate of inflation to remain in the lower half of the inflation-control target range.
This prospect is reinforced by a projected further unwinding of the temporary effects on inflation stemming from past movements in the exchange rate and commodity prices.
For the medium term, a key issue is whether the trend of inflation might move below the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent target range for inflation control.
As discussed in the Report, a solid pickup in the pace of activity through 1996 and into next year is expected to begin to take up economic slack.
Nevertheless, the fact that this scenario would still leave a margin of excess supply in the economy points to the possibility of the trend of inflation falling below 1 per cent six to eight quarters into the future.
This in turn would imply an easing in the desired medium-term path of monetary conditions.
However, consideration must also be given to the possibility that, in response to the significant easing in monetary conditions that has occurred during the past six months, the economy could turn out to be much stronger, particularly if there were a pronounced turnaround in economic confidence among households.
Some further monitoring of the flow of economic information may therefore be needed to come to a judgment on the balance of risks regarding the trend of inflation.
Over the past six months, with continued downward pressure on inflation and sluggish aggregate demand, the Bank took further action to ease monetary conditions by reducing the Bank Rate and its operating band for the overnight interest rate.
The economy was weaker than expected, particularly in the second quarter, mainly because of a larger-than-anticipated inventory correction.
However, recent economic indicators are pointing to a quickening pace of activity through the balance of this year and into 1997 in response to the cumulative amount of monetary ease now in place.
Moreover, Canada's favourable economic fundamentals - low inflation, an improving fiscal position, and a strengthening balance of international payments - have allowed short - and medium-term interest rates to fall substantially below those in the United States and have led to growing confidence among both domestic and foreign investors that negative interest rate differentials can be sustained.
The major uncertainty continues to centre on how rapidly the economy will respond to the past easing in monetary conditions and what implications this response will have for the degree of downward pressure on inflation over the medium term.
In any event, there is ample room for economic expansion and employment growth without a resurgence of inflation.
Transitory influences on inflation (such as the exchange rate and commodity price movements that pushed inflation up in 1995) have virtually disappeared.
Thus, fundamental supply/demand factors are the only major forces affecting inflation at this time.
As anticipated at the time of the last Report, the 12-month rate of increase in the core CPI has remained in the lower half of the inflation-control target range in recent months.
As of September 1996, this measure of inflation was 1.2 per cent, compared with 1.5 per cent in March 1996 and a high of 2.7 per cent reached in May 1995.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was 1.5 per cent in September, down from a peak of 2.9 per cent in May 1995.
Other broad measures of inflation also fell.
The rate of increase in the fixed-weight GDP deflator was 1.7 per cent in the second quarter of 1996 on a year-over-year basis, compared with 2.2 per cent in the fourth quarter of 1995.
The year-over-year rate of increase in the chain price index for GDP excluding inventories - a measure of price changes that adjusts for shifts in the composition of spending - edged down only marginally over the same period to 1.8 per cent.
Spare capacity in product markets and slack in labour markets continued to place downward pressure on inflation over the past six months.
Meanwhile, the upward pressure on inflation from earlier commodity price increases and from the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar dissipated.
However, as household spending began to recover, some of the discounts - notably on clothing - offered by retailers in late 1995 and early 1996 were reversed, pushing up selected consumer prices.
However, because of a sharp inventory correction by firms, economic activity edged up at a pace only marginally faster than in the second half of 1995.
There were a number of indications of gathering momentum in underlying demand in the first half of the year.
External demand continued to bolster the expansion of the Canadian economy, as growth in the US economy strengthened.
This was reinforced by the strong competitive position of Canadian industry, which has favoured both export growth and increased substitution of domestic products for imports.
Exports would have been even stronger had it not been for sluggish demand in the major European countries, low inventories of grain in Canada, and high foreign inventory levels for some primary commodities.
In the first two quarters of 1996, the volume of exports increased at an average annual rate of 2.4 per cent, while the volume of imports decreased by 0.9 per cent.
The overall increase in net exports during the first half of 1996 was the main factor behind the movement of the current account into a surplus position for the first time in over 10 years.
The improvement in the current account since the end of 1993 amounts to $37 billion, or 5 percentage points of GDP.
Household spending - especially on housing - began to recover in the first half of 1996.
This recovery, which occurred in the face of continued slow growth in total personal disposable income and in total employment, was buoyed by some improvement in consumer confidence.
The decline in interest rates since October 1995 has improved how households perceive their near-term financial situations and has made them more inclined to make major purchases.
This may also have reflected steady job creation in the private sector as well as some clarification as to which public sector employees would be most affected by restructuring initiatives.
Private sector employment grew by 1.5 per cent at an annual rate over the first two quarters of 1996, following a rise of 1.3 per cent in the previous two quarters.
In the first half of 1996, firms worked off the sizable inventory imbalances that had emerged in the first half of 1995, and by the middle of 1996 the aggregate non-farm business stock-to-sales ratio was back down close to a desired level that is trending downwards because of innovations in inventory control.
The second quarter of 1996 saw rapid reduction of stocks in both the manufacturing and wholesale trade sectors, to close to - or perhaps slightly below - firms' desired levels.
In contrast, retail stocks at midyear continued to exceed desired levels.
Now that the overall inventory situation is more balanced, future growth in final sales should feed through into higher production.
Notwithstanding the encouraging developments, domestic demand has been soft.
To a large extent this reflects corrections to past debt accumulation.
The dominant factor here has been the effect of the necessary restraint at both the federal and provincial levels.
Business fixed investment also remained sluggish in the first half of 1996, after three years of strong growth up to mid-1995.
Since the economy's capacity to produce continued to grow faster than overall demand in the first half of 1996, the Bank estimates that the output gap widened to between 3 and 3 1/2 per cent at midyear, up from between 2 1/2 and 3 per cent at the beginning of the year.
This implies continued downward pressure on the trend of inflation.
Exchange rate movements typically feed through to the core CPI by a factor of about one-fifth over a two-year period.
Accordingly, the effect on inflation of the 20 per cent depreciation of the Canadian dollar that ended in mid-1994 has almost disappeared in recent months.
This effect was estimated to have accounted for over 1 percentage point of the 2.7 per cent rise in the core CPI at its peak in May 1995.
Intense competition, combined with improved productivity in both the retail and the manufacturing sectors, has also continued to put downward pressure on the prices of various imported and import-competing goods.
World commodity prices (quoted in US dollars) have on average remained firm since last April.
Price increases have been most pronounced for lumber and livestock.
Lumber prices have risen considerably on news of continuing high levels of activity in the US housing market.
Livestock prices have recovered because of strong demand and reduced supplies, stemming from relatively high feed grain prices earlier in the year.
In contrast, the prices of many industrial materials and grains have declined markedly.
Prices for base metals have weakened, and there has been a substantial reduction in newsprint prices.
Grain prices have recently fallen back from very high levels as a good crop year improved supply prospects.
Crude oil prices surged in early September, following renewed indications of further delays in planned petroleum sales by Iraq (because of the heightened tensions there), after having eased between April and August with the seasonal reduction in demand.
The lower prices received by Canadian producers of many industrial materials are contributing to the easing in the year-over-year increases in the aggregate industrial product price index and in aggregate export prices.
The impact of earlier commodity price increases (such as those for paper) on consumer price inflation has largely disappeared since the spring, and it is far too soon for the recent declines in the prices of many industrial materials to affect inflation at the consumer level.
Markets continued to be strongly competitive in the first half of 1996, maintaining the pressure on producers to control costs and to raise productivity.
Wages, the largest component of total costs, continued to rise at a moderate pace during the first half of 1996, with the rate of increase in average compensation per hour worked at 2.4 per cent in the second quarter on a year-over-year basis, unchanged from the fourth quarter of 1995.
Underlying wage increases (excluding the effects on aggregate wages of such factors as changes in the composition of employment) are estimated to be between 1.5 and 2 per cent on a year-over-year basis.
In many cases, wage increases in the private sector reflected earlier substantial gains in productivity, while restraint measures continued to influence wages in the public sector.
Wage growth should remain fairly steady, since wage settlements in the first eight months of 1996 averaged 1.2 per cent in the private sector and 0.5 per cent in the public sector, little changed from 1995.
Productivity growth (output per person-hour) resumed in the first half of 1996, although at a very modest pace.
This contributed to an easing in the year-over-year rise in unit labour costs in the first half of 1996.
Firms in some sectors, such as construction, appear to have adjusted their workforces to the unanticipated slowing in demand that occurred towards the end of 1995.
The gap between productivity and the real wages paid by producers continued to widen in the first half of 1996.
This mainly reflected the impact on broad measures of producer prices, resulting from the marked reduction in the rate of growth of aggregate commodity prices.
To close the gap, the economy would have to experience faster labour productivity growth than real wage growth for a period of time.
In response to weak aggregate demand, which increased the risk that inflation might fall below the target range, the Bank has been providing more monetary stimulus to the economy.
Since May, there have been five reductions of a quarter point each in the Bank Rate and in the operating band for the overnight interest rate.
On the first three occasions, the Bank issued a press release stressing that the rate cuts were needed because of persistent disinflationary pressures.
The two most recent reductions represented a response to the stronger currency, and were designed to keep overall monetary conditions from tightening.
As has occurred regularly in the recent past, the money market anticipated the Bank's actions, and 3-month rates led the decline in the overnight rate.
Other financial markets, including that for foreign exchange, reacted positively to the rate cuts, with participants recognizing that lower interest rates were consistent with Canada's economic fundamentals.
Indeed, over the past six months, financial markets have increasingly focussed on underlying factors that favour the Canadian economy.
These include success in maintaining a low rate of inflation, improved public sector finances (although the high levels of debt remain a concern), and the improvement in the current account of the balance of payments.
As financial markets set aside concerns about the immediate political situation in Quebec, these fundamentals came to the fore.
Internationally, the publication of data suggesting that interest rates in the United States might have to rise caused occasional weakness in US bond markets.
Otherwise, the external environment has been conducive to the easing of monetary conditions in Canada.
There have been widespread declines in interest rates in Europe, and international financial markets have been quite orderly.
Strong fundamentals have underpinned the exchange value of the Canadian dollar and, at the same time, facilitated the decline in Canadian interest rates.
The 90-day differential vis--vis the United States has dropped to about - 200 basis points.
A negative spread for more than a brief period was last seen in the early 1970s.
The yield differential is now also negative for short- and medium-term bonds.
Long-term spreads remain positive, but somewhat below historical averages, following the decline in Canadian bond yields since the spring.
This suggests that investors have revised downwards their assessments for inflation or for other risks in Canada relative to the United States.
A recognized commitment to a sound monetary policy and the determined action on budget deficits of the last couple of years have provided the conditions essential for this decline.
Since the exchange rate varied within a narrow range for most of the past year, the monetary conditions index declined more or less in step with short-term interest rates.
Following a rise in the Canadian dollar, the two reductions in the Bank Rate and the operating band for the overnight rate in October rebalanced the mix of monetary conditions at the easier level.
The real MCI now stands at its lowest value for the post-1970 floating exchange rate regime, indicating that the cumulative easing of monetary conditions amounts to a very significant stimulus to economic activity in Canada.
This works towards counteracting sluggish household spending and the short-run impact of fiscal restraint.
In assessing the possible future course of inflation, the Bank considers mainly the factors affecting the balance between aggregate demand and aggregate supply over the next four to six quarters.
It also examines measures of inflation expectations and the pace of monetary expansion when formulating its views on the future path of output, inflation and desired monetary conditions.
Growth in the US economy strengthened during the first half of 1996.
Indeed, the US economy probably moved back into a state of slight excess demand at midyear, although there is no evidence of increased inflationary pressures in broad measures of prices and production costs.
The combined effects of a rise in long-term interest rates and a trade-weighted appreciation of the US dollar may return the US economy to a path of sustainable growth in the next few quarters, although one should not rule out the need for some monetary tightening by the Federal Reserve.
While economic expansion in the major European countries was modest during early 1996, the Japanese economy, on balance, experienced more robust growth.
Moderate growth is anticipated among the overseas countries during the second half of 1996, sustained in many cases by past easing in monetary conditions in these economies.
Although the prices of certain commodities will likely come under downward pressure in the near term, a modest upward trend in the overall commodity price index should begin sometime in early 1997.
The price of crude oil should fall as supplies from non-OPEC sources increase, although any forecast is subject to considerable uncertainty because of current political and military developments in the Middle East.
Grain prices may continue to decline with favourable news about this year's crops worldwide.
As users continue to reduce stocks, newsprint prices could keep declining over the near term.
Nonetheless, on average, the prices of other industrial commodities are expected to strengthen as the pace of expansion among the major industrial countries reduces the world's excess capacity.
On balance, external demand should continue to contribute to the expansion of the Canadian economy in the second half of 1996, reinforced by the strong competitive position of Canadian industry.
Recent surveys of investment intentions and business confidence suggest a rebound in capital spending during the second half of 1996.
In addition, the recent sharp inventory correction, which took stocks back down close to desired levels, should set the stage for the growth in final sales to feed directly into stronger growth in production.
Although fiscal restraint will continue and the current low personal savings rate will tend to moderate household spending, the effect on overall domestic demand growth should be outweighed by the past easing in interest rates and by higher private sector employment.
Despite some weakness in overall employment, private sector employment increased by a further 2.4 per cent at annual rates in the third quarter.
While the General Motors strike will have a noticeable impact on the average level of activity in the fourth quarter, if this effect is excluded, the Bank would expect a pickup to above-potential growth rates in both the third and fourth quarters.
On the same basis, private sector forecasters would be looking for an average growth rate of 3 1/2 to 4 per cent at annual rates for this period.
The Bank would thus expect average growth of over 4 per cent through the four quarters ending in the fourth quarter of 1997, which contrasts with the 3 per cent expected by private sector forecasters.
The above projections indicate that the downward pressure on core inflation coming from slack in product markets will remain an important factor in coming quarters.
Similarly, labour market conditions will continue to restrain any significant upward wage pressures.
It is also expected that a pickup in the pace of economic expansion in the second half of 1996 will lead to stronger productivity growth, which would also limit overall cost increases.
Since the Canadian dollar has been stable over the past two years, little or no pressure on inflation should come from past exchange rate movements.
Nor would one expect downward pressure arising from the recent marked declines in the prices of many industrial materials over the next few months, since there tend to be fairly long lags in the pass-through to consumer prices.
Furthermore, a wide range of evidence continues to suggest that competition in the Canadian retail marketplace remains intense, with strong consumer resistance to most price increases.
Nonetheless, some of the discounting offered by retailers earlier in the year seems to have been reversed after unwanted stocks, especially seasonal items, were cleared out.
If household demand continues to recover and if retail stocks come into better balance in the second half of 1996, more of this discounting may end, leading to some increase in prices.
However, on balance, transitory factors should have little effect on the core CPI.
Expectations, an important factor in the outlook for inflation, are affected by current inflation and by the credibility of the Bank's inflation-control targets.
As credibility grows, expectations may increasingly reflect the midpoint of the inflation-control target range.
In the September quarterly survey of Canadian business confidence conducted by the Conference Board, 97 per cent of respondents (compared with 83 per cent in the December 1995 survey) expected inflation to be 2 per cent or less over the near term.
In the Conference Board's June quarterly Survey of Forecasters, it was anticipated that CPI inflation would average about 1.5 per cent in 1996, slightly lower than the survey forecast three months earlier, and would edge up to about 1.7 per cent in 1997.
Since the difference between the yield on nominal long-term bonds and that on Real Return Bonds is based largely on the expectations of investors about inflation over the long run, movement in the differential can be used to gauge the trend of expectations.
This differential has remained roughly constant for the past year, after having declined in 1995.
Broad definitions of money based on M2+ decelerated in the second quarter.
Simply on the basis of the historical correlation between broad money and prices, this slowing would suggest that inflation could fall close to the bottom of the target range by the end of the year.
Expansion of narrow money, M1, has been maintained at about 10 per cent year-over-year.
Since an increase in the real value of transactions balances has, in the past, been a valuable predictor of growth in GDP, this would indicate that activity should accelerate strongly in the second half of 1996.
However, a sizable part of the increase in M1 results from the introduction of attractive interest rates on corporate current accounts.
Moreover, predictions from real M1 have shown a distinct upward bias in recent years.
Forecasts from a longer-run model of inflation using M1 currently suggest a rate of between 1 and 1 1/2 per cent over the next two years.
With the continuing large amount of excess supply in the Canadian economy, the outlook for the next half year is for inflation to remain in the lower part of the inflation-control target range.
For the medium term, the key issue remains whether the trend of inflation might move below the 1 to 3 per cent target range.
The substantial monetary easing over the past 12 months increases the probability of a solid pickup in the pace of activity in the second half of 1996 and into 1997.
How strong this pickup will be is hard to foresee but, as noted earlier, it is expected to be appreciable.
Since this scenario could still carry a margin of excess supply through 1997, it points to the possibility of inflation drifting below 1 per cent by the end of 1997.
This would suggest the possible need for further easing in monetary conditions over the medium term.
However, depending on the future course of inflation expectations and on whether the economy turns out to be particularly strong - for example, if there were to be a strong rebound in consumer confidence - any decline in the core CPI inflation rate may be quite small and short-lived.
The momentum of the economic expansion in Canada is not yet established firmly enough to allow us to be confident about the balance of risks for the trend of inflation.
It is clear, however, that the Canadian economy has room for strong expansion and employment growth without a resurgence of inflation.
Since the last Report, the Canadian economy has advanced broadly in line with expectations.
Inflation has remained low, the domestic economy has begun to respond to the substantial degree of monetary ease in place, and the external economic environment has been favourable.
With rapidly improving fiscal positions of governments and expectations of continued low inflation underpinning the value of the Canadian dollar, short - and medium-term interest rates have remained appreciably lower than those in the United States.
In this low-interest-rate environment, private sector activity has begun to pick up significantly and to offset the dampening effects on spending and consumer confidence coming from public sector restraint.
Economy-wide, however, the level of aggregate demand remains well below capacity limits.
In this set of circumstances, the Bank of Canada has kept monetary conditions accommodative.
With the economy gathering momentum, the challenge for monetary policy will be to encourage monetary conditions that support a durable expansion and preserve Canada's low trend rate of inflation.
CPI inflation picked up somewhat over the past six months, largely in response to temporary influences.
However, slack in markets is still exerting downward pressure, and core inflation has remained in the lower half of the Bank's target range for inflation control.
As anticipated at the time of the last Report, the 12-month rate of increase in the core CPI has remained in the lower half of the inflation-control target range, although it has moved up somewhat since the autumn of 1996.
As of March 1997, core inflation was 1.7 per cent compared with a recent low of 1.2 per cent in September 1996.
The increase in the core measure appears to have largely stemmed from transitory factors that will not have a lasting effect on inflation.
These include a rise in air fares due to higher fuel costs, an increase in auto insurance costs in Ontario following a government-mandated change in the insurance system, and some reconstitution of retail profit margins.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was 2.0 per cent in March 1997, compared with 1.5 per cent last September.
Higher energy prices contributed to this rise, but this effect is expected to be only temporary since prices at the producer level have declined significantly since mid-January.
In contrast, other broad measures of inflation have fallen since the last Report, partly because of a decline in the terms of trade - the price of exports relative to the price of imports.
The rate of increase in the fixed-weight gross domestic product deflator was 1.4 per cent in the fourth quarter of 1996 on a year-over-year basis, compared with 1.7 per cent in the second quarter.
The year-over-year rate of increase in the chain price index for GDP excluding inventories - a measure of price changes that adjusts for shifts in the composition of spending - also edged down to 1.5 per cent over the same period.
In volume terms, GDP rose at a 3 per cent annual rate over this period compared with just over 1 per cent during the first half of the year.
Particularly encouraging were indications of gathering momentum in domestic demand by both households and businesses.
With lower interest rates and an associated improvement in the perception of their near-term financial situations, consumers were more inclined to make major purchases.
Thus, consumer confidence improved despite the sluggish performance of personal disposable income.
Lower debt-servicing costs, household balance sheets that are generally in reasonable shape, continued job creation in the private sector, and pent-up demand for housing and consumer durables have all been positive influences.
Business fixed investment also increased substantially in the second half of 1996, resuming the strong growth recorded in the three years up to mid-1995.
Firms continued to pursue opportunities to improve productivity and to expand capacity.
The increase in expenditures in 1996, as in the earlier part of this decade, was concentrated in machinery and equipment, particularly computers and other office equipment.
Manufacturers and telecommunications companies both boosted investment outlays considerably.
Indeed, after substantial cuts in stocks earlier in the year, firms in the manufacturing and wholesale trade sectors began adding to inventories again in the second half of 1996 in response to higher sales levels.
The substantial gain in domestic demand, especially for machinery and equipment, contributed to a rebound in import volumes in the second half of 1996.
In marked contrast, exports fell back noticeably towards year-end in spite of continued growth in the US economy.
Exports also fell because of reduced activity in the US housing and automobile markets, and a decline in US demand for machinery and equipment.
These factors, together with the strong gains in Canadian imports of machinery and equipment, returned the current account to a small deficit position by the end of the year.
Aggregate demand in the second half of 1996 advanced somewhat faster than estimates of the economy's capacity to produce.
Such estimates, however, are imprecise and also change as the structure of the economy changes.
Accordingly, calculations of potential output and the output gap should be seen as point estimates within a wide confidence band.
At the end of 1996, the Bank's estimate of the output gap narrowed to around 2.5 per cent, down from a revised 3.0 per cent at midyear.
A percentage change in the exchange rate typically feeds through to the core CPI by a factor of about one-fifth over a two-year period.
The appreciation of the Canadian dollar over the past two years should thus be a source of slight downward pressure on consumer prices for at least the next year.
In recent months, prices at the consumer level have been significantly affected by earlier increases in energy prices at the producer level.
The prices of fuel oil, gasoline, and natural gas have been directly affected, while indirect effects have raised the prices for other goods and services that are included in the core CPI, such as air travel.
Since mid-January, however, much of the sharp 1996 increase in the prices of both crude oil and natural gas at the producer level has been reversed as a result of milder temperatures.
Thus, the effect on the level of the CPI is likely to be temporary.
World commodity prices (quoted in US dollars) have, on average, remained firm since last October.
Price changes have been most pronounced for crude oil and metals.
Metals prices have improved on news of strengthening demand and lower stocks.
At the producer level, the aggregate industrial product price index has shown little change on a year-over-year basis.
This has reflected higher prices for petroleum products, offset by declines (earlier in 1996) in the prices received by Canadian producers of newsprint, pulp, and metals.
Product markets in Canada are strongly competitive, maintaining the pressure on producers to control costs and to raise productivity.
Cost increases were generally low in the second half of 1996.
Wages, the largest component of total costs, continued to rise at a moderate pace during the second half of the year.
Average annual wage settlements in the private sector rose to 2.1 per cent over the same period.
Settlements in the automotive sector averaged 3.5 per cent, while all other private sector settlements averaged 1.5 per cent.
In recent years, settlements in the manufacturing sector have generally been high relative to those in other sectors, largely because of substantial gains in productivity.
Influenced by fiscal restraint, wage settlements in the public sector in the second half of 1996 remained at very low levels (0.4 per cent).
Overall, based on these and other measures of wages, underlying wage increases (i.e., excluding such factors as changes in the composition of employment) are estimated to have been in a range between 1.5 and 2 per cent on a year-over-year basis-unchanged over the last four years.
Productivity (output per person-hour) picked up somewhat in the second half of 1996, an improvement from its earlier sluggish advance.
This improvement contributed to an easing in the year-over-year rise in unit labour costs.
Over the period since the last Report, the Bank has sought to broadly maintain the monetary conditions achieved in the autumn of 1996.
To keep monetary conditions from tightening as the Canadian dollar strengthened, the Bank lowered the operating band for the overnight interest rate on four occasions in October and November.
The Bank Rate, which sets the upper limit for the operating band, was reduced by a quarter point each time.
A key factor influencing the Canadian dollar has been the strong increase in the US currency against most major currencies.
The US dollar has been bolstered by the robust US economy and by the growing expectation that short-term interest rates in the United States would have to rise.
In this situation, the Canadian dollar has weakened against the US dollar, but has shown considerable strength against G-10 currencies other than the US dollar (G-9 currencies).
On an overall G-10 basis, while showing considerable volatility, the Canadian dollar has remained at or above the levels that prevailed through much of 1996.
In the last week of March, the Federal Reserve raised the federal funds rate by one-quarter of a percentage point, a move that was largely anticipated by markets.
Financial markets have reacted to subsequent US economic data by incorporating expectations of further moves by the Federal Reserve.
This reaction has spilled over to financial markets internationally.
In the case of Canada, short - and medium-term interest rates have moved up.
As well, the dollar has weakened further against the US dollar but continues to show firmness against other major currencies.
Despite the recent volatility, Canadian financial markets continue to be supported by the fundamentals of low inflation, declining public sector borrowing, and an improved external balance of payments.
Over the past two years, these factors have led to a large decrease in the risk premiums that investors require on Canadian assets, and they continue to underpin market expectations of a future appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
This, in turn, has allowed Canada-US interest differentials from short-term to 10-year maturities to remain negative.
When evaluating the prospects for inflation, the Bank considers the key factors affecting the balance between aggregate demand and aggregate supply over the next four to six quarters.
It also looks at measures of inflation expectations and at the pace of monetary expansion when forming its views on the future path of output, inflation, and desired monetary conditions.
During the second half of 1996, the pace of spending in the US economy strengthened more than had been expected, leading to a small estimated increase in excess demand by year-end.
Indications are that spending in the first quarter of 1997 was strong as well.
The rate of increase in real GDP should ease over the next few quarters as export growth falls back in line with developments in the principal trading partners of the United States.
The contrast between a strong US economy and moderate economic activity in the major overseas countries has led to an appreciation of the US dollar.
While core inflation (which excludes food and energy prices) has continued to decline slowly in the United States, partly as a result of the dollar's appreciation and the buffering effect of slack in overseas economies, there are some indications that tight labour markets are starting to put upward pressure on wages.
Monetary conditions have already tightened as a result of the currency appreciation and the March increase in the federal funds target.
The Federal Reserve may nonetheless see a need to raise interest rates further to prevent a buildup of inflationary pressures and thereby help to sustain the economic expansion.
Economic expansion in the major European countries was weaker than expected during the second half of 1996, while the pace of spending in Japan was somewhat more rapid than anticipated.
Moderate growth is expected to continue in Europe and Japan during the first half of 1997, sustained by past easings in monetary conditions.
Prices of commodities are likely to remain under downward pressure in the near term.
The price of crude oil, in particular, could fall further as supplies from non-OPEC sources increase and the tight inventory situation of late 1996 is rectified.
Prices of most industrial commodities are expected to strengthen on average as the pace of expansion among the major economies reduces the world's excess capacity.
On balance, external demand should resume its role as an important factor in the expansion of the Canadian economy in the first half of 1997, reinforced by the strong competitive position of Canadian industry.
In particular, Canadian exports should rebound in early 1997 from their low level in the fourth quarter of 1996, which was caused partly by transitory factors, including the General Motors strike.
Prospects are also good for further gains in domestic demand.
The past easing in interest rates should lead to further increases in household demand.
Indeed, the combination of low interest rates and pent-up demand for housing and consumer durables is likely to lead to a continuation of the recent higher rates of household borrowing.
This could result in a low level for the personal savings rate for a number of quarters.
The increase in interest-rate-sensitive spending along with the anticipated resumption of buoyant growth in exports should boost private sector employment and, hence, support household spending.
These influences should counter factors working in the opposite direction, particularly those coming from further fiscal restraint.
They should also tend to offset the effects on consumer confidence coming from the current high unemployment rate.
In addition, recent surveys of business confidence by the Conference Board, as well as Statistics Canada's survey of investment intentions for 1997, suggest that capital spending should remain strong during the first half of the year.
Thus, both external and domestic factors point to continued robust expansion in the first half of 1997.
In our view, the economy should also have significant momentum into the second half of this year, sustained by the substantial amount of monetary easing that has already taken place.
The Bank thus continues to expect average growth of around 4 per cent through to the fourth quarter of 1997, which should translate into annual growth of somewhat less than 4 per cent for the year.
On a comparable annual average basis, private sector forecasters are currently looking for growth of 3.3 per cent.
The Bank expects further economic slack to be taken up through 1998.
The above outlook implies that the downward pressure on core inflation from slack in product markets will remain a factor in coming quarters.
Similarly, labour market conditions will continue to restrain any significant upward pressure on wages.
It is expected that continued strong economic expansion this year will lead to further substantial gains in productivity, which would also limit overall cost increases.
The tendency of the Canadian dollar to appreciate over the last two years should put slight downward pressure on the CPI in coming months.
Furthermore, both the earlier marked declines in the prices of many industrial materials and the recent easing in the prices of both crude oil and natural gas should contribute to reductions in inflation at the consumer level.
On balance, these transitory factors should have little net effect on core CPI inflation over the next several quarters.
Expectations of inflation, an important influence on the future path of inflation, are affected both by recent developments in inflation and by the public's perception of the Bank's inflation-control objectives.
As economic agents gain confidence in the Bank's ability to meet its announced objectives, expectations may be increasingly anchored by the inflation-control target range.
Short-term inflation expectations have been steady in recent months.
In the regular survey reported in the Conference Board's December Index of Business Confidence, 87 per cent of respondents expected inflation to be 2 per cent or less over the near term.
In the Conference Board's March quarterly Survey of Forecasters, it was anticipated that CPI inflation would average about 2.0 per cent in 1997 and would edge down to about 1.9 per cent in 1998.
Longer-term inflation forecasts as reported by Consensus Economics Inc.  are also in the lower part of the inflation-control target range.
Any significant changes in the inflation expectations of investors would likely be captured in the spread between the yield on a conventional long-term federal government bond and that on a Real Return Bond.
The tendency of this spread to decline since 1994 suggests that expectations in the financial markets have been consolidating around a low inflation rate.
However, it is difficult to estimate precisely the implied level of expected inflation because the differential between the yields on the two types of bonds is also affected by factors such as liquidity and investor preferences as well as by inflation uncertainty.
Growth in M1 (the narrow definition of money) has increased at a double-digit rate in the last six months.
This increased demand for transactions balances has been driven primarily by the low interest rates permitted by the low-inflation environment, but also to some extent by the introduction of highly competitive interest rates on current accounts over the past couple of years.
A temporary increase in M1 growth is therefore consistent with a return of the Canadian economy to full capacity.
However, if such rapid growth in M1 were to persist into 1998, it would not be consistent with preserving low inflation.
Accordingly, M1 growth will require close monitoring.
Broad definitions of money, which have been useful short-term indicators of inflation, have become more difficult to interpret over the past five years or so because of the large expansion of mutual funds.
Holders of deposits have switched on a large scale into equity and bond funds, which are outside the M2+ aggregate.
Thus, measures of broad money that take account of this substitution have grown more rapidly than M2+.
Nevertheless, the rate of increase of broad aggregates generally remains moderate.
Forecasts based on adjusted M2+ show an annual inflation rate of about 1.5 per cent in the second quarter of 1997.
The slope of the yield curve is another variable that often contains information about the expected evolution of the economy.
During recent quarters, the difference between the long-term government bond yield and the 90-day commercial paper rate has been unusually wide, at about 4 percentage points.
In the past, spreads of this magnitude have been followed by a rapid expansion of activity during the next year.
Inflation, measured by either core CPI or the total CPI, has been somewhat higher than was expected at the time of the last Report.
This increase, however, largely reflects the influence of temporary factors, and with excess supply continuing to be a source of downward pressure on inflation, the outlook for the next half-year is for core inflation to remain in the lower half of the inflation-control target range.
This momentum has significantly reduced the risk that inflation will drift below the 1 to 3 per cent target range.
Thus, in the absence of unexpected developments in either inflation or demand pressures, the possible need for further easing in monetary conditions discussed in the last Report has largely disappeared.
Over the medium term, as slack in the economy is absorbed, the Bank will need to promote a less stimulative path for monetary conditions in order to maintain Canada's low trend of inflation, and thereby contribute to a durable expansion in activity consistent with the capacity of the economy to produce goods and services.
In the last half-year, the economic expansion in Canada has become well established, supported by low inflation, highly stimulative monetary conditions, and a strong US economy.
These positive factors have more than offset the dampening effects that fiscal restraint and private and public sector restructuring have had on spending and consumer confidence.
Private sector activity has been moving ahead briskly, with household spending and business investment in machinery and equipment leading the way.
In addition, strong growth in world trade has supported a rising trend in Canadian exports.
Consequently, economic slack has been taken up more rapidly than in the second half of last year.
These developments have been broadly in line with expectations set out in the last Report, where it was concluded that the highly stimulative monetary conditions of the past two years would no longer be necessary as the economy gained momentum and moved towards full resource utilization.
Consistent with this assessment, in early summer the Bank acted to counter an easing in monetary conditions stemming from persistent weakness in the exchange rate.
In early autumn further action was taken, this time to moderate the extent of monetary stimulus in the economy.
With the economy now gathering strong momentum and the influences of restructuring and past fiscal policy measures becoming increasingly less pronounced, the challenge for monetary policy is to promote a level of monetary conditions that preserves low inflation and thereby contributes to making this economic expansion a long-lasting one.
Over the past six months, core CPI inflation has shown little change, remaining in the lower half of the Bank's inflation-control target range.
The downward pressure on inflation coming from slack in product markets has been partly offset by efforts in a few sectors to boost profit margins.
As anticipated in last May's Report, the 12-month rate of increase in the core CPI has remained in the lower half of the inflation-control target range.
As of September 1997, core inflation was 1.5 per cent compared with 1.7 per cent last March.
Other statistical measures of trend inflation convey the same message.
Even so, core inflation has been slightly higher than was expected six months ago.
The downward pressure on inflation from excess capacity has been partly offset by efforts to restore profit margins in retailing and certain other consumer-oriented sectors.
In addition, as inflation expectations in recent years have become more heavily influenced by the inflation target and less sensitive to past inflation, the overall downward pressure from slack in the economy may, in effect, have been somewhat lessened.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was 1.6 per cent in September 1997, compared with 2.0 per cent in March.
Energy prices, after some easing in the spring related to earlier reductions in producer prices, strengthened towards the end of the summer because of temporary gasoline shortages in North America.
Other broad measures of inflation have fallen significantly since the last Report, largely because of the impact of a decline in the terms of trade - the price of exports relative to the price of imports.
In particular, the export prices of crude oil, natural gas, and wheat all fell considerably during the first half of 1997.
The rate of increase in the fixed-weight gross domestic product deflator was 0.8 per cent in the second quarter of 1997 on a year-over-year basis, as was the rate of increase in the chain price index for GDP excluding inventories - a measure of price changes using weights that adjust to keep up with shifts in the composition of spending.
Over this period, real GDP rose at an annual rate of 4.3 per cent, after a gain of 3.1 per cent over the second half of 1996.
The expansion has been supported by strong growth in the US economy and the accommodative monetary conditions that were necessary to offset the restraint on aggregate demand that had come from measures to reduce fiscal deficits and from private sector restructuring.
With momentum in the economy building, labour market activity also picked up, and employment rose substantially.
The strong recovery in household expenditures, which began last year, continued in the first half of 1997, even though there was little change in real personal disposable income because of higher tax payments.
These higher taxes stemmed largely from special factors such as a high level of realized capital gains, the introduction of an accelerated program for collecting employment insurance premiums, and higher contribution rates for the Canada Pension Plan and Quebec Pension Plan.
Consumer spending on big-ticket items such as housing, motor vehicles, and other consumer durables was particularly robust, fuelled by low interest rates and pent-up demand.
The rise in spending left the personal savings rate at a postwar low, but the net worth of the household sector continued to increase significantly in the first half of the year owing to capital gains.
The pickup in employment growth in the last two quarters contributed to the improving environment for the personal sector and, hence, to a further pronounced recovery in consumer confidence.
Gains in private sector employment have been broadly based, both by province and by industry.
An increase in the labour force participation rate (the percentage of those of working age who are in the labour force) since last March also points to improved labour market conditions.
Spending by businesses on capital goods remained strong in the first six months of 1997.
These expenditures were again focussed on improving efficiency and expanding capacity.
Furthermore, after having been concentrated in machinery and equipment earlier, the increase in expenditures has broadened to include spending on structures.
In particular, the oil and gas sector boosted investment outlays considerably, mainly in response to the earlier surge in energy prices.
Inventory levels remained in good balance.
Encouraged by higher sales levels, companies in both the manufacturing and wholesale trade sectors continued to increase their stocks in the first half of the year.
The growth of exports resumed in the first half of 1997 in response to a strong US economy and the resolution of labour disputes in the automobile industry in October 1996.
US demand was led by business investment in machinery and equipment and by consumer demand.
Canadian exports of automobiles in the second quarter of 1997 were adversely affected by temporary parts shortages, however.
The robust recovery in both domestic demand and exports contributed to a further substantial increase in import volumes in the first half of 1997.
Imports of industrial parts and materials continued to increase strongly.
This largely reflects the growth in export volumes linked to the expansion of two-way trade following various trade liberalization agreements over the past 10 years.
The current account of Canada's balance of payments has returned to a modest deficit position over the past year, largely in response to strong growth in domestic demand for import-intensive items and a deterioration in the terms of trade.
Nevertheless, on balance, the current account position has improved considerably since 1994, mainly because of the increased competitiveness of Canadian firms and the relatively stronger growth of external demand.
Overall, demand continued to grow faster in the first half of 1997 than the Bank's estimate of the economy's capacity to produce.
As a result, the Bank calculates that the output gap narrowed to about 1 per cent at midyear, down from about 2 per cent at the end of 1996.
Such estimates, it should be noted, are imprecise and should be viewed as points within a wide confidence band.
In the first half of 1997, firms continued to make concerted efforts to keep unit cost increases low and to improve productivity.
Wages, the largest component of total costs, again rose at a moderate pace, with gains largely consistent with productivity increases.
Annual wage settlements in the unionized private sector averaged 2.4 per cent, compared with 2.1 per cent in the second half of 1996.
The average pay increase for most non-unionized employees was 2.6 per cent in 1997, according to the Conference Board of Canada's compensation outlook survey.
Overall, based on these and other measures, underlying wage increases (i.e., excluding such factors as changes in the composition of employment) in the private sector appear to have been in a range between 2 and 2.5 per cent on a year-over-year basis.
Average wage settlements in the public sector remained low (0.9 per cent).
Thus, the average underlying wage increase in the total economy is estimated to have been somewhat below 2 per cent.
Productivity (output per person-hour) rose substantially in the first half of 1997, partly because of the cyclical pickup in output.
As a result, the year-over-year rise in unit labour costs remained very low.
Much of the increase in labour income per person-hour (excluding the self-employed) likely reflected the ongoing shift in the composition of employment towards higher-paid occupations and the timing of irregular bonus payments.
Over the past six months, core inflation has been somewhat higher than anticipated, partly because of factors that are not expected to have a lasting effect on inflation.
For instance, profit margins in some consumer-related sectors (such as retailing and air transportation) have improved because the recovery in household spending has permitted less-generous price discounting.
The resulting rise in prices for such items as air fares and some semi-durable goods (e.g., clothing) has been large enough to have a noticeable impact on the core CPI.
Now that profit margins in these sectors are closer to normal levels, there is less likelihood of further significant price-level increases and, hence, of an ongoing effect on inflation.
Some temporary influences on the core CPI have been working in the opposite direction.
For example, automobile manufacturers offered higher rebates over the summer on selected models to clear out 1997 stocks.
The modest appreciation of the Canadian dollar from levels in early 1995 has also exerted slight downward pressure on consumer prices so far this year.
This spring, earlier declines in energy prices at the producer level started to feed through and reverse previous price increases at the consumer level.
In particular, the prices of fuel oil and gasoline began to decline, as anticipated in the last issue of the Report.
Towards the end of the summer, however, gasoline prices strengthened because of temporary shortages in North America.
Aside from developments in energy, world commodity markets have had relatively little net impact on consumer prices since last April.
Prices of non-energy commodities (quoted in US dollars) have, on average, remained reasonably firm.
At the producer level, the aggregate industrial product price index has increased modestly on a year-over-year basis in recent months.
Nonetheless, the 12-month rise in prices of finished industrial goods has edged down.
In the last Report, the Bank concluded that some reduction in the highly stimulative monetary conditions would be needed as the economy gained momentum and moved towards full resource utilization.
By early summer, however, monetary conditions had eased even further as a result of persistent weakness in the exchange rate.
In response to this development, on 26 June the Bank raised the Bank Rate by 25 basis points to 3 per cent and its band for overnight interest rates to between 3 and 3 per cent.
This action led to a rise in commercial paper rates and a firming of the dollar, thus reversing the earlier easing in monetary conditions.
On 1 October, the Bank raised the Bank Rate by another 25 basis points to 3 per cent and its band for overnight interest rates to between 3 and 3 per cent.
This action was taken to moderate the degree of monetary stimulus in the economy given the rapid growth in the measure of money used for transactions and evidence that the economic expansion was becoming more self-sustaining.
While money market rates had already largely incorporated this move, the Canadian dollar firmed somewhat further.
As a result of the interest rate and exchange rate movements following the 26 June increase in the Bank Rate, the monetary conditions index moved back up to around -5.5.
This was close to the average for the first half of 1997, during which time the index fluctuated between approximately -6.0 and -5.0.
After the move on 1 October, the index rose somewhat further to between -5.5 and -5.0.
At this level, monetary conditions continue to provide strong support for the economy.
In late October, however, there was some reversal of the index as a result of currency weakness occurring at the time of the sharp swings in global equity markets.
Canadian interest rate premiums continued to decline during the past six months because of the dramatic progress that has been made in eliminating government deficits and growing expectations that inflation will remain low.
Medium - and long-term interest rates have fallen further below those in the United States.
Moreover, in both countries, interest rate levels at these terms to maturity have declined, with long-term rates in Canada touching record lows.
With these declines in market interest rates, comparable mortgage rates in Canada have fallen.
The yield curve in Canada nonetheless remains upward sloping.
Embodied in the curve are expectations of a rise in short-term money market rates.
But gauging the magnitude of these expectations is complicated by the existence of term-to-maturity premiums in interest rates that reflect the uncertainty investors feel about instruments with maturities beyond the shortest terms.
In addition, the sharp reduction in the supply of treasury bills, owing to lower Government of Canada borrowing requirements and a shift to longer-term financing, has affected the relationship between yields on treasury bills and those on other money market instruments such as commercial paper.
This buoyancy has reflected the strong cyclical position of the US economy compared with those of its major trading partners.
The Canadian dollar has benefited from this strength relative to overseas currencies.
However, on a trade-weighted basis against all G-10 currencies, the Canadian dollar has declined slightly, with firmness against overseas currencies offset by some weakness vis--vis the US dollar.
As for the future, market expectations for the Canadian dollar appear to be increasingly based on the view that some combination of a rise in short-term interest rates and in the value of the dollar will occur as the economic cycle matures.
It is this expectation of currency appreciation that has enabled short-term interest rates in Canada to remain some 180 basis points below comparable US rates.
When evaluating the prospects for inflation, the Bank focusses on the main factors influencing the balance, over the next 12 to 18 months, between the level of aggregate demand and the economy's capacity to supply goods and services.
An important element for the outlook will be assessing the net effect on aggregate demand of the degree of monetary stimulus on the one hand and of the diminishing impact of restructuring and fiscal policy measures on the other.
The Bank also examines measures of inflation expectations and the pace of monetary expansion.
Notwithstanding recent developments in southeast Asia and associated volatility in global equity markets, external factors remain positive for the Canadian economy.
In the United States, the pace of economic expansion exceeded the estimated growth of potential output during the first half of 1997.
The rate of increase in real GDP should ease over the next few quarters, as a reduction in pent-up household demand and the possible consequences of the recent stock market decline slow the growth of domestic demand.
US inflation, excluding food and energy prices, moderated slightly to 2.2 per cent in September.
The good inflation performance to date suggests that the amount of excess demand in the US economy at midyear was probably less than the Bank had previously estimated.
Nevertheless, the recent pace of expansion still raises the possibility of an increase in inflation pressures.
Although monetary conditions tightened in the first half of the year as a result of the appreciation of the US dollar and the March increase in the federal funds target rate, the Federal Reserve may at some point have to raise interest rates somewhat further in order to head off inflation and thus prolong the economic expansion.
Economic expansion in the major European countries was slightly stronger than expected during the first half of 1997.
In the second quarter, growth in the major continental economies was supported by strong growth in exports, while in the United Kingdom, activity continued to advance at a faster rate than potential output.
Moderate to strong growth is expected in these economies during the second half of the year.
In Japan, the economy contracted sharply in the second quarter, more than reversing the spending surge that took place ahead of the April sales tax increase.
While easy monetary conditions should provide some support for modest growth of the Japanese economy for the remainder of the year, the recent volatility in southeast Asian financial markets has added a distinct downside risk to the outlook.
Commodity prices are expected to firm somewhat.
In particular, prices of most industrial commodities should rise as the expansion in the major economies reduces the world's excess capacity.
Both external demand and the strong competitive position of Canadian industry should continue to contribute to growth in Canada's exports over the next year.
The high level of investment spending in many export-oriented industries should allow exporters to satisfy rising demand as new capacity comes on stream.
Domestic demand will continue to be supported by the ongoing effects of low interest rates.
Moreover, the restraint on domestic demand from fiscal deficit-reduction measures and the impact on consumer confidence coming from restructuring are diminishing.
Thus, several factors point to improved prospects for sustained, strong growth in household demand.
The heightened pace of economic expansion has contributed to gains in private sector employment.
As both external and domestic fundamentals promote substantial gains in aggregate demand, employment should continue to grow and should lead to increases in personal disposable income.
Added to the effects of low interest rates and improved confidence levels, these gains in employment and income as well as pent-up demand for housing and consumer durables, should further boost household demand over the next year.
The recent stock market decline is not expected to have any significant effect on activity.
Business investment expenditures are also expected to continue growing strongly during the second half of the year.
This view is supported by the most recent survey of business confidence by the Conference Board as well as Statistics Canada's mid-year survey of investment intentions.
Overall, both external and domestic factors point to vigorous economic activity into 1998.
The Bank anticipates average growth of about 4 per cent through to the fourth quarter of 1998.
This should translate into annual average growth of a little less than 4 per cent for 1997 and of around 4 per cent for 1998.
On a comparable basis, a recent Department of Finance survey shows that private sector forecasters are currently looking for growth of 3.7 per cent in both 1997 and 1998.
With this profile, the Bank's current estimate is that the economy may very well be producing at full capacity towards the end of 1998, although there remains considerable uncertainty regarding such estimates.
Until then, slack in goods and labour markets will continue to put downward pressure on inflation.
Strengthening household demand may further reduce the degree of price discounting in the Canadian retail marketplace as some retailers attempt to improve profitability.
Earlier marked declines in the prices of many industrial materials are, however, still working their way through the system and should continue to put slight downward pressure on the CPI in coming months.
On balance, these factors should have little net effect on the core CPI through 1998.
Expectations of inflation, as noted earlier in Technical Box 2, are influenced both by recent developments in inflation and by the credibility of the Bank's inflation-control strategy.
In the regular survey reported in the Conference Board's September Index of Business Confidence, 84 per cent of respondents (compared with 78 per cent in the March 1997 survey) expected inflation to be 2 per cent or less over the near term.
In the Conference Board's September quarterly Survey of Forecasters, it was anticipated that CPI inflation would average about 1.8 per cent in 1997 and 1.9 per cent in 1998.
The 1997 forecast was marginally lower than that of six months earlier, while the 1998 forecast was unchanged.
Longer-term inflation forecasts, as reported by Consensus Economics Inc., are also in the lower part of the inflation-control target range.
With the decline in the nominal long-term interest rate, the differential between the yields on conventional and Real Return Bonds has narrowed further, extending a three-year downward trend.
This would suggest that investors have continued to adapt to the low-inflation environment.
The decline in this differential so far this year is similar to that in other industrial countries that issue index-linked bonds.
While one cannot extract a precise estimate of expected inflation from this differential, it would appear that expectations are within the inflation-control target range.
M1 (the definition of money that includes the money used in transactions) grew at an unsustainably rapid pace over the first half of 1997, reflecting low interest rates and the lingering effects of the introduction of competitive interest rates on current accounts.
More recently, M1 growth on a year-over-year basis has started to moderate towards a pace more consistent with inflation remaining within the target range.
The rapid growth of real M1 over the past year indicates that the robust expansion of real GDP should continue into next year.
The yield curve also suggests that economic growth should be strong in 1998.
A steep yield curve has usually been followed by strong GDP growth over the next four quarters.
Taken together, these indicators are consistent with real GDP growing faster than estimated potential through 1998.
M2+ ( the traditional broad definition of money, which includes money market mutual funds) has been growing very slowly on a year-over-year basis since the last Report.
Normally, this would indicate the absence of inflationary pressure.
In recent years, however, holders of deposits have been seeking higher yields by switching into mutual funds, most of which are outside the M2+ aggregate.
The adjusted M2+ aggregate incorporates mutual funds sponsored by financial institutions that issue deposits or deposit-like instruments, in order to capture the shifts within those institutions from deposits to mutual funds.
However, investors have also been shifting from deposits to mutual funds other than those sponsored by such institutions.
Over the past 12 months, M2+ has increased by 0.2 per cent, adjusted M2+ by 3.1 per cent, and M2++ by 7.9 per cent.
Such disparate outcomes make it difficult, at present, to draw inferences about inflation from the growth of these traditional and adjusted broad monetary aggregates.
Research is continuing into measures of broad money that might have a more reliable link with future inflation.
In summary, three factors lead us to expect core inflation to remain in the lower half of the inflation-control target range well into 1998.
First, downward pressure on core inflation arising from slack in both product and labour markets will continue to play a role over this period.
Second, strong growth in productivity in the context of robust economic expansion will contribute to keeping overall unit cost increases low.
Third, inflation expectations, based on the various measures available, appear to be centred slightly below the midpoint of the target range.
Once the Canadian economy reaches full capacity, however, inflation pressures could mount unless the Bank is successful in ensuring that the upward trend of aggregate demand is consistent with the growth of the economy's potential to produce.
Inflation, measured by either the core CPI or the total CPI, is expected to stay in the lower half of the inflation-control target range between now and the next Report.
Over the period to the end of 1998, the economy is projected to expand at an annual rate of about 4 per cent.
Since this pace exceeds the estimated growth of potential output for this period, the Bank's current expectation is that the output gap will tend to close towards the end of 1998.
Under these circumstances, the challenge for monetary policy will be to set monetary conditions at levels that encourage a pace of economic expansion that achieves full use of the economy's capacity and at the same time preserves low inflation.
This is how monetary policy can contribute to continued, sustainable gains in output and employment.
To this end, some moderation in the degree of monetary stimulus will be needed over the medium term.
While the strategic direction of policy is thus clear, taking measured steps in that direction raises three issues: the timing of policy actions; the amount of adjustment to monetary conditions required; and the extent to which stimulus will be reduced as a result of movements in short-term interest rates as opposed to a strengthening of the Canadian dollar.
Given recent economic trends, and apart from any complications that might arise from a more prolonged bout of the financial market volatility experienced in late October, it seems likely that further action to reduce monetary stimulus will be required between now and the next Report.
In these circumstances, it also seems likely that somewhat higher short-term interest rates and a firmer exchange rate will both contribute to less-stimulative monetary conditions.
However, with low inflation and improved fiscal positions, increases in interest rates and in overall monetary conditions should be much smaller than in past periods of high inflation.
During the next six months, the Bank will have to closely monitor the momentum of the economy and developments in financial markets in order to assess the pace and extent of adjustments to monetary conditions necessary to preserve low inflation and thus bring about a long-lasting economic expansion.
It is by prolonging the expansion that we will achieve sustained reductions in unemployment in Canada.
Since last November's Monetary Policy Report, a number of unanticipated developments have required reassessment and response by the Bank.
The unfolding events in Asia and the sharp decline in primary commodity prices, which have had significant economic and financial market implications for Canada, were not readily predictable.
At the same time, an unexpectedly strong US economy has helped to partly offset the negative effects of the Asian crisis.
Late last year, inflation temporarily dropped below 1 per cent (the lower bound of the Bank's target range).
In addition, strikes by postal workers and by Ontario teachers in the fourth quarter of 1997, together with the January ice storm in eastern Canada, have had significant short-term effects on production and demand in the economy.
During this period of uncertainty and temporary setbacks, the Bank attempted to identify the more lasting influences on the economy and inflation.
In addition, it had to address the volatility in financial markets associated with the uncertainty surrounding the shocks.
This volatility was most clearly evident in several sharp declines in the external value of the Canadian dollar.
Under these circumstances, the Bank raised short-term rates three times since the November Report, by a total of 125 basis points.
First, despite the fallout from the problems in Asia, the underlying momentum of the Canadian economy remained positive, and the persistent decline in the Canadian dollar was leading to an undesirable easing in monetary conditions, which were already stimulative.
Second, at times, the speed of decline in the currency was such that, had it continued, there was a clear risk that investor confidence in Canadian dollar assets would have been undermined.
Although there are continuing uncertainties and downside risks to the immediate outlook, stemming from the Asian situation, there have been signs that stability is returning to most of southeast Asia and Korea.
On balance, the Bank feels that the economic expansion in Canada, supported by both external and internal factors, will remain solid through this year and into 1999, although not as strong as expected last autumn.
The details of this outlook and the policy implications for maintaining inflation inside the Bank's target range are the subject of this Report.
Core inflation (CPI excluding food, energy, and the effect of indirect taxes) dropped temporarily below the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent target range late last year.
On balance, however, it declined only slightly over the past six months.
Contributing to the decline were intensifying competitive pressures in the retail market.
The 12-month rate of increase in the core CPI edged down from 1.5 per cent last September to 1.2 per cent in March.
It was noted at that time that retailers were trying to restore profit margins by raising prices.
In fact, price discounting subsequently increased as competition among retailers to maintain or expand market share intensified.
There still appears to be significant excess capacity in this sector, which will probably take quite some time to correct.
Currency depreciations in Asia also intensified competition, particularly among motor vehicle producers.
More fundamentally, the ongoing slack in product markets has continued to put downward pressure on inflation.
The major offsetting factor working to hold inflation up appears to be expectations of inflation that remain close to the 2 per cent midpoint of the range.
The brief fall of core CPI inflation below the target range last November and December was caused by transitory factors.
These included increased automobile rebates, exceptionally heavy discounts on clothing, promotions of new cablevision channels, and an earlier-than-expected seasonal decline in hotel rates.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was 0.9 per cent in March 1998, compared with 1.6 per cent in September 1997.
Broad inflation measures have also eased substantially since the last Report.
The chain price index for GDP - a measure of price changes using weights that adjust to keep up with shifts in the composition of spending - showed no inflation at the end of 1997 from its level a year earlier, compared with a year-over-year rate of 1.0 per cent in the second quarter of 1997.
In addition to the factors lowering CPI inflation, the broad measures, which include the prices of exported products, have been directly affected by the considerable decline in the prices of primary commodity exports.
For manufacturing, the aggregate industrial product price index has shown relatively modest increases on a year-over-year basis.
These gains have mainly reflected the impact of the Canadian dollar depreciation on export prices for such products as motor vehicles and many manufactured commodities, where contracts are typically in US dollars.
As expected, the Canadian economy expanded at a rapid pace during 1997, with real GDP increasing by 4.2 per cent (fourth quarter over fourth quarter).
This expansion continued to be supported by accommodative monetary conditions and by strong growth in the US economy.
It was accompanied by marked gains in employment during the year.
However, two major strikes (postal workers and Ontario teachers) shaved about 0.5 percentage points off GDP growth, which was recorded at 3.5 per cent.
Several temporary influences also affected the pace of activity in the first quarter of 1998.
The recovery from the fourth-quarter labour disruptions provided a boost to economic growth.
In contrast, the January ice storm in eastern Canada, which has significantly affected the month-to-month changes in activity, is estimated to have lowered real GDP growth in the first quarter by about 0.2 percentage points.
This should subsequently be more than made up as a result of the reconstruction effort.
At the same time, the fallout from developments in Asia and lower commodity prices began to have a tempering effect on growth.
When all the factors are considered, growth in the first quarter is estimated to have been in a range of about 3 to 3 per cent (at an annual rate).
Export volumes rose briskly in the second half of 1997, partly because of strong US demand for machinery and equipment and consumer durable goods.
Exports of non-energy commodities also grew substantially in spite of price declines.
But within this category, lumber exports fell markedly, following a sharp decline in housing demand in Japan.
More generally, exports to Japan and other Asian countries declined over the period, but these account for only about 8 per cent of Canada's total merchandise exports.
In the last half of 1997, businesses continued to substantially increase their spending on capital goods, especially on machinery and equipment.
Investment in non-farm inventories also rose in this period, stimulated by continued strong growth in sales.
At times, some inventory imbalances emerged in certain segments of the retail sector, such as motor vehicle dealerships and department stores.
At year-end, inventories still appeared to be too high in some retail categories (such as department stores).
Household expenditures continued to rise strongly in the second half of 1997, although at a slightly lower rate than in the first half.
Consumer spending on durable goods, particularly motor vehicles, grew at a healthy pace, as a result of low interest rates, pent-up demand, and continued marked gains in employment.
It appears, however, that some spending on motor vehicles towards year-end was brought forward from the first quarter of 1998 in response to special financing incentives and rebates offered by North American producers.
The growth of household spending on items other than consumer durable goods slowed somewhat, partly in response to the effect of the work stoppages on incomes.
Imports continued to increase substantially in the second half of 1997.
This rise was especially pronounced because the growth in domestic spending came mainly from purchases of machinery and equipment and motor vehicles, a large portion of which tend to be imported.
In addition, many of our highly manufactured exports have a very large import content.
As Asian currencies depreciated, imports from these countries, which account for about 12 per cent of Canada's total merchandise imports, rose more strongly than total imports.
With imports rising more strongly than exports and commodity prices declining, there was a further deterioration in the current account deficit to almost 3 per cent of GDP at year-end.
In the first quarter of 1998, the recovery from the two major strikes gave a boost to household spending on items other than motor vehicles and energy.
Consumer expenditures were also supported by continued strong employment growth in the private sector.
On balance, however, the underlying pace of expansion moderated somewhat.
Lower shipments of energy commodities and a reduction in the growth of automotive product exports led to slower export growth than in the second half of 1997, and the rate of increase in business investment slowed from last year's robust pace.
Because of the reduced demand for energy (reflecting the relatively mild winter) and a decline in motor vehicle sales, imports were little changed.
With aggregate spending during the last half of 1997 and early this year continuing to expand at a rate greater than the growth of potential output, slack in the economy continued to be taken up.
Bank staff estimate that the output gap narrowed to about 1 per cent at the end of 1997, down from 1 per cent at mid-1997.
There is considerable uncertainty about the measurement of the output gap.
Nonetheless, it is useful for policy purposes to make provisional point estimates of its most likely value.
Wage increases remained moderate in the second half of 1997.
Annual wage settlements in the unionized private sector averaged 1.7 per cent, compared with 2.4 per cent in the first half.
Wage settlements in the public sector edged up, averaging 1.4 per cent in the second half of 1997.
The average pay increase for non-unionized employees was 2.6 per cent in 1997, based on the Conference Board of Canada's compensation outlook survey.
Thus, the average underlying wage increase in the total economy is estimated to have been close to 2 per cent on a year-over-year basis.
This is confirmed by a new source of wage data from Statistics Canada.
For instance, in the first quarter of 1998, the year-over-year increase in the average hourly wage, excluding over-time, was 1.5 per cent for all permanent employees and 2.4 per cent for permanent full-time employees.
Productivity growth increased last year, partly because of the cyclical pickup in output.
As a result, unit labour costs edged down by year-end.
The growth of labour income per employee had been unexpectedly high early in 1997 because of larger-than-normal bonus payments that were associated in part with the productivity gains.
The Bank aims at directing monetary conditions along a path that will move the trend rate of inflation towards the centre of the target range over time.
Most important is the expected trend in the level of aggregate demand relative to the economy's potential supply.
Since there is considerable uncertainty about the future evolution of these variables, the desired level of monetary conditions at any time is not precise, but rather is a range within which the Bank is comfortable.
New information and changing views of the probable profile of spending and its implications for future inflation may change the desired path for monetary conditions.
At times, there may be considerable uncertainty regarding the effects on the Canadian economy of external or domestic shocks.
In these circumstances, it may be appropriate for the Bank to wait for more information before deciding on any change in the path for monetary conditions.
In the meantime, monetary conditions may fluctuate over quite a wide range without drawing a response from the Bank.
In the Report issued last November, the Bank drew attention to the anticipated closing of the output gap over the coming quarters and to the implied need for some reduction, over the medium term, in the degree of monetary stimulus being provided to the economy.
The November Report also recognized the unfolding situation in Asia, noting that close attention would have to be paid to the implications for the Canadian economy.
As the crisis in southeast Asia deepened and spread to Korea, there was a tendency for financial markets and commentators to assume a "worst-case scenario.
" Pessimistic views about the impact of the Asian crisis on the evolution of commodity markets and on the Canadian economy, together with a worldwide flight to US assets by investors, resulted in a reduction in the relative attractiveness of Canadian dollar instruments.
This was exacerbated by the occasional recurrence of nervousness about political developments in Quebec.
In addition, there was some uncertainty in the markets about the likely reaction of monetary policy to all these developments.
Together, these factors led to volatility in Canadian financial markets and several episodes of sharp downward pressure on the Canadian dollar.
The extent of the resulting depreciation was seen by the Bank as an inappropriate easing of monetary conditions.
Some important positive developments for the Canadian economy appeared to have been overlooked by markets, particularly the persistent strength of the US economy, as well as the significant declines in medium - and long-term interest rates.
Under the circumstances, the Bank raised the Bank Rate on three occasions, by a total of 125 basis points.
These actions were intended both to counter the undesired easing in monetary conditions and to forestall a potential loss of confidence in Canadian dollar assets.
The forces at play resulted in considerable volatility in monetary conditions over the past six months, and the Bank's monetary conditions index has fluctuated over a relatively wide range.
A low of -6.2 was reached near the end of January.
This means that, following the increases in short-term interest rates, monetary conditions have been somewhat less stimulative compared with the very accommodative range of -5.0 to -6.0 that had prevailed for much of 1997.
As a result of the three changes, the Bank Rate increased from 3.75 per cent to 5 per cent.
The increase on 25 November was 25 basis points, while those on 12 December and 30 January were 50 basis points each.
Short-term yields rose in step with these increases.
With little change in short-term rates in the United States, three-month differentials have narrowed, but Canadian short-term rates are still some 60 to 70 basis points below those in the United States.
Following the interest rate increases, the Canadian dollar recovered from the record low of 68.10 US cents on 29 January.
Nevertheless, over the past six months the Canadian dollar fell in value by about 1 per cent against the US dollar.
The US dollar's persistent strength against all major currencies over the period stemmed from the US economy's strong performance.
It also reflected a shift by investors towards the world's most liquid financial market in response to the turbulence in Asia.
As a result, when measured against the currencies of all the G-10 countries, the Canadian dollar has declined less than against the US dollar alone.
Bond markets in many countries in the G-10 area, including Canada, have been buoyant, partly because of an improved inflation outlook, and partly because of the flight of capital from Asian countries.
In spite of the increases in domestic short-term interest rates, Canadian bond yields have declined to new lows.
Moreover, the negative long-term differential against the United States has persisted despite the safe-haven attraction of US dollar investments.
The rise in short-term rates and the decline in long-term rates has caused the yield curve to pivot, and to have a progressively flatter slope.
In the past, the slope of the yield curve has been a good predictor of changes in output, and such a flattening has often been followed by slower output growth.
However, the declines in bond yields over the past couple of years have largely resulted from lower expectations of inflation and lower risk premiums.
These lower risk premiums provide a stimulus to economic activity.
When assessing the likely path of inflation over the next two years, the Bank looks closely at the current and anticipated amount of aggregate excess supply or demand, measures of inflation expectations, and the rate of monetary expansion.
The Bank reviews all important factors, both external and internal, that could influence the evolution of aggregate demand and supply.
The effect of the Asian crisis on the world economy and the sharp declines in commodity prices, stemming from the crisis and from other sources, represent a significant negative external shock for the Canadian economy.
However, the effects of this shock are being partly offset by positive developments elsewhere.
In response to the Asian crisis and to an improved inflation outlook, medium - and long-term interest rates have declined in the major industrial countries, including Canada.
These declines in rates have also helped to boost the value of equities.
Recent financial market developments are thus working to help sustain demand in many industrial countries.
The expansion of aggregate demand in the United States was surprisingly strong throughout 1997 and outstripped the estimated growth of capacity.
Although the momentum of the US economy continued to be greater than expected into the first quarter of 1998, the growth of real GDP should slow to a more sustainable rate this year as net exports decline in response to a loss of competitiveness and weak Asian demand.
An anticipated inventory correction should also moderate growth somewhat.
US inflation, as measured by the CPI excluding food and energy prices, has been stable at around 2.2 per cent since last September.
Although the strong US dollar is expected to put further modest downward pressure on inflation over the remainder of this year, the recent rise in wage pressures could push inflation up in 1999.
Monetary conditions in the United States have continued to tighten since mid-1997, owing to the appreciation of the US dollar.
The low inflation rate and the anticipated impact of the Asian crisis on the US economy have helped to keep short-term rates steady.
However, unless the Asian crisis has a significant dampening effect on the US economy over the longer term, the Federal Reserve may be faced with the need to raise interest rates to counter a buildup of inflation pressures.
Growth in 1997 averaged 7 per cent and is expected to remain robust this year.
Growth in the United Kingdom has begun to slow in response to past tightening in monetary conditions and increased fiscal restraint.
Domestic demand in France and Italy has strengthened, while in Germany it has remained relatively weak.
With growth in the continental European economies expected to pick up in the first half of 1998, the overall outlook for Europe in 1998 is bright.
The Japanese economy failed to recover significantly in the second half of 1997, after contracting sharply in the second quarter.
The government has taken important actions to recapitalize financial institutions, and further fiscal measures are planned.
Despite these initiatives, little economic improvement is expected this year, owing to the adverse impact of the Asian crisis, the fragility of the financial sector, and the low level of consumer and business confidence.
Increasingly, the Japanese economy is becoming the major source of uncertainty for the world economy.
International commodity prices are expected to recover somewhat in the second half of 1998.
The anticipated reduction in global excess capacity, together with a correction for some possible overshooting of commodity markets on the downside, should contribute to a firming in the prices of industrial materials.
Overall, the growth of Canadian exports is expected to ease this year, as developments in Asia and an anticipated moderation in US economic growth more than offset the stimulus of the recent exchange rate depreciation.
This could adversely affect the volume of commodity exports over the near term, until the expected rise in commodity prices occurs.
On the domestic front, business investment, supported by low medium - and long-term interest rates, is expected to remain relatively strong in 1998.
Capital outlays will also be boosted by the rebuilding of electrical transmission and distribution networks made necessary by the ice storm in eastern Canada.
Overall, however, the increase in business investment will likely be less than the strong gains in both 1996 and 1997, as some resource-based projects will be held back by past decreases in commodity prices.
Inventory investment is likely to be reduced somewhat as some retailers correct stock imbalances.
Continued gains in full-time employment, low interest rates, and rising private sector wealth should support robust growth in household demand, including housing.
But there is some risk that consumer outlays will be less buoyant, to the extent that much of the pent-up demand for consumer durables and housing has already been met.
On the basis of the evidence currently available, the Bank anticipates growth of about 3 per cent (at annual rates) through to the fourth quarter of 1998 and into the first half of 1999.
On an annual average basis, the implied growth for 1998 is also 3 per cent.
This is somewhat stronger than the most recent average of private sector forecasts, which has edged down to 3.3 per cent.
In the Bank's view, the economy should reach a level close to the current estimate of full capacity during the course of 1999.
Since estimates of full capacity are inexact, the Bank will closely monitor all the indicators that could provide information on the capacity of the economy.
Throughout the remainder of this year, however, slack in goods and labour markets should continue to put downward pressure on inflation.
While a number of structural changes are still under way in the retail sector, the recent degree of price discounting could lessen somewhat through the rest of 1998.
Recent Asian currency movements, however, may contribute to some price cutting - particularly for motor vehicles, other durable goods, clothing and footwear - as retailers turn to cheaper sources of supply.
In contrast, the recent depreciation of the Canadian dollar against the US dollar will put upward pressure on the prices of many imported goods over the next year or two.
On balance, these temporary factors should have little net effect on the core CPI in the next few months.
More upward pressure on prices is likely, however, towards the end of this year and into 1999, as the lagged effects from the recent depreciation of the Canadian dollar against the US dollar become increasingly important.
Wage rates are expected to rise at a moderate rate through 1998 because of low price inflation and continued excess supply in the labour market.
Productivity growth may edge down this year along with output growth, so unit labour costs may increase, but only modestly.
Such an outlook for labour costs would be consistent with core inflation remaining in the lower half of the target range this year.
This is down slightly from 84 per cent in the September survey.
A survey of private forecasters by the Department of Finance in February showed CPI inflation averaging 1.5 per cent this year and 1.7 per cent in 1999.
Over the past six months, forecasters have revised their near-term projections downwards (2 per cent had been predicted for 1998 last September) in response to the unexpected decline in inflation observed in November and December and expectations that slack in the economy would take longer to be absorbed.
Long-term inflation forecasts gathered by Consensus Economics Inc.  are very close to the midpoint of the target range.
As the yield on conventional bonds has continued to decline, so has the differential between the yields on nominal and Real Return Bonds.
Since November, this spread has fallen below 2 per cent, the midpoint of the current inflation-control target range.
This should not be taken as a precise estimate of the expected rate of inflation because the yield spread is also affected by differences in secondary market liquidity and by the shifting portfolio needs and preferences of investors.
Nevertheless, the decline in the nominal-real interest differential is clear evidence that the financial markets have increasing confidence in low inflation over a long horizon.
After slowing in the second half of 1997, the year-over-year growth of narrow money, M1, picked up in the first quarter of 1998.
However, slowing is expected to resume in the second half of 1998 and to continue into 1999.
An appreciable part of the surge since 1996 has been due to the introduction of more attractive interest rates paid on demand deposits and to the decline of other short-term interest rates in recent years.
The portfolio shifts occasioned by these developments should now be almost complete.
The Bank estimates that a long-run rate of increase in M1 of about 2 to 5 per cent would be consistent with inflation within the target range and growth at potential.
The current rate of M1 increase remains high enough to support robust growth of output, and declining excess capacity, in the first half of 1998.
As the chart shows, there has been a fairly close correspondence over the business cycle between changes in the real value of M1 and those in GDP about two quarters later.
Broad money represents a liquid store of value.
The Canadian broad aggregates consist mainly of liquid assets held by the personal sector, and their behaviour may carry information about the value of planned outlays by households.
In fact, broad money has, in the past, been a good indicator of short-term nominal spending and core inflation.
But the enormous shift from deposits to mutual funds has rendered the previously accepted definitions obsolete.
For the time being, we can only estimate a range for the underlying growth.
An adjusted M2+ aggregate, which contains only mutual funds sponsored by deposit-taking financial institutions, provides a lower bound; the corresponding upper bound can be derived from a very broad aggregate M2++, which includes all mutual fund holdings.
On this basis, underlying broad money growth over the past year is estimated at between 1 and 7 per cent.
As matters stand, the rates of increase recently experienced seem to be in line with continued low inflation.
Three factors should put some upward pressure on core inflation.
First, inflation expectations appear to be above the current rate of inflation.
Second, some of the effect of the intense competitive pressures in the retail sector that has been putting downward pressure on inflation should wear off in coming months.
Third, the recent depreciation of the Canadian dollar will tend to raise prices slightly.
At the same time, there are factors that lead us to expect core inflation to remain below the 2 per cent midpoint: slack in product and labour markets; continued growth in productivity that will limit rises in unit labour costs; and downward pressure on the prices of imports from East Asia.
Overall, we expect our measure of core CPI inflation to increase slightly over the balance of 1998.
Our projection for the end of the year and the first half of 1999 is between 1 and 2 per cent.
None of the factors at work imply a persistent rise in the trend rate of inflation.
In last November's Report, it was concluded, based on the strength of the economic outlook at that time, that measured steps to moderate the degree of monetary stimulus would be required over the medium term to preserve low inflation and bring about a long-lasting expansion.
This Report continues to present the view that the underlying momentum of the Canadian economy is strong.
However, in light of the impact of the Asian situation and lower commodity prices, the outlook is not quite as strong as had been expected.
On the basis of the evidence currently available, the average annual rate of economic expansion through to the middle of 1999 is projected to be about 3 per cent.
For the balance of 1998 and the first half of 1999, our measure of core CPI inflation is expected to rise slightly but to stay in the lower half of the inflation-control target range.
While the uncertainty surrounding the outlook is much greater than usual, the risks associated with it appear balanced.
The main downside risks relate to developments in Asia and commodity prices.
Offsetting these is evidence, particularly from the continuing strength of the US economy and from the expansion of the narrow monetary aggregate, M1, in Canada, that the underlying momentum of the economy might be stronger than we expect.
When all these factors are considered, it is the Bank's judgment that between now and the next Report, monetary conditions in the recent range would be broadly appropriate in the absence of further shocks.
This would be consistent with the above outlook of robust aggregate demand, the economy continuing to take up slack, and inflation inside the target range.
Given the degree of uncertainty that is likely to persist over this period, monetary conditions may continue to fluctuate over a relatively wide range.
Subsequently, if the underlying momentum of activity remains as strong as is currently expected, less-stimulative monetary conditions would be called for as the economy approaches and achieves full capacity.
During the past six months, global economic uncertainties have intensified, largely as a result of developments in emerging-market economies.
The task for the Bank of Canada, as for monetary authorities in other industrial countries, has been twofold: to assess the implications of those developments for domestic economic activity and inflation, and thus for the stance of policy; and to address the volatility and nervousness in financial markets.
In our May Monetary Policy Report, we noted that a high degree of uncertainty existed because of the international environment.
On the other hand, a buoyant US economy was providing strong support for Canadian exports.
In these circumstances, it was anticipated that the volatility in interest rates and exchange rates could be exacerbated.
This in turn would likely cause monetary conditions to fluctuate over a relatively wide range.
In late summer, the turbulence in global markets intensified as a result of developments in Russia, particularly the decision by the Russian authorities to unilaterally declare a debt moratorium.
This unanticipated action reverberated through financial markets around the globe.
Many emerging-market economies were hit by large capital outflows and a sharp widening of interest rate spreads as nervous investors sought a safe haven, primarily in US and European government bond markets.
Similarly, there was a widening of spreads between private sector bonds and government bonds and a reduction in liquidity in markets for more risky instruments.
The past six months have thus been a period of coping with a high degree of uncertainty and volatility in global financial markets and of assessing the economic consequences of international developments for Canada.
This Report reviews the actions taken by the Bank of Canada.
It also gives our current assessment of the domestic and international factors at play, focusing on their implications for the economy and for future inflation relative to the Bank's inflation-control target range.
Given current international uncertainties, we must stress the highly conditional nature of the outlook.
However, it is also important not to lose sight of the positive elements supporting continued expansion of the Canadian economy - a declining public sector debt-to-GDP ratio, restructuring of the private sector, and low and stable inflation.
Over the past six months, core inflation (CPI excluding food, energy, and the effect of changes in indirect taxes) has remained near the bottom of the Bank's inflation-control target range.
Inflation and the target range The 12-month rate of increase in the core CPI was 1.2 per cent in September, unchanged from March and slightly lower than our expectations.
Two other statistical measures of the trend rate of inflation (CPIX and CPIW) have remained relatively stable at about the same level as core inflation.
The fall in the external value of the Canadian dollar over the past year has pushed up prices in certain sectors.
Although the depreciation of the Canadian dollar has contributed to a marked rise in the import prices of many non-energy consumer goods and services, only part of this effect has passed through to consumer prices, given the typical lags in this process.
The depreciation has also contributed to increased demand for domestically produced goods and services and, hence, to price increases for such items as hotel accommodation.
Overall, we estimate that the price-level effects of the depreciation account for 0.4 percentage points of September's core inflation rate.
Another factor that may be putting upward pressure on core inflation is an expectation that, over the longer term, inflation will be higher than the current low levels.
Most importantly, excess supply in the economy and pressures from Asian suppliers have continued to restrain price increases.
Competition in the retail sector has remained particularly intense, although the considerable number of store closures in the first half of 1998 has reduced excess retail capacity.
In the long-distance telephone market, deregulation has increased competition and reduced rates.
In addition, computer prices have been falling at an accelerated rate owing to technological change, lower component costs due to currency depreciations in Asia, and excess world capacity in the microchip industry.
For the total CPI, the 12-month rate of increase was 0.7 per cent in September, compared with 0.9 per cent last March.
Further reductions in crude oil prices caused retail energy prices to decline, which in turn held back the overall rise in total CPI inflation.
Year-over-year inflation based on the chain price index for GDP - which is characterized by weights that adjust to shifts in the composition of spending - was barely positive in the second quarter of 1998.
Moderate price increases for both consumer products and business fixed investment goods were offset by continuing reductions in the prices of commodity exports.
The declines in world commodity prices reflected both demand and supply factors.
Worldwide demand for commodities has fallen, primarily as a result of developments in Asia.
Unusually large grain harvests and increased exports of metals, crude oil, and pulp from resource-rich countries were largely responsible for increased commodity supplies.
There were also concerns that certain resource-rich countries that were having financial difficulties, such as Russia, might export more in the future.
At the manufacturing level, the aggregate industrial product price index has changed little on a year-over-year basis.
Prices of many finished exports with contracts in US dollars, such as motor vehicles, increased appreciably following the depreciation of the Canadian dollar against the US dollar.
However, this has been largely offset by lower prices for most manufactured intermediate goods, which reflect weak commodity prices.
Following robust growth during 1997, Canada's economic expansion slowed in the first half of 1998, as the effects of developments in Asia began to show through, particularly in the resource sector.
In the first half of this year, real GDP rose at an annual rate of about 2.5 per cent.
The recovery from strikes in the fourth quarter of 1997 boosted activity in early 1998, while labour disruptions in the automotive, pulp and paper, housing, airline, and education sectors cut activity between June and September.
However, when the first three quarters of 1998 are taken as a whole, these factors had little effect on growth.
Export volumes grew briskly in the first half of 1998 but eased from the vigorous pace of 1997.
US demand for machinery and equipment and intermediate goods continued to increase.
Exports of automotive products also fell sharply in June and July, mainly because of temporary shutdowns at General Motors, following labour disruptions at two US parts plants.
Household expenditures increased strongly in the first half of 1998, though at a slightly lower rate than in 1997.
Spending on items other than durable goods and housing continued to expand at a fairly robust pace, moving the savings rate to a record post-war low.
In the first quarter of 1998, further substantial employment gains (especially in paid, full-time jobs) helped keep consumer confidence relatively high.
Subsequently, employment growth eased, and there were renewed concerns over job prospects towards mid-year.
New residential construction in the second quarter was also slowed by a series of strikes in the Toronto area.
With those strikes largely settled by early August, housing starts recovered towards pre-strike levels.
Business spending on capital goods grew less than last year, but was still substantial in the first half of 1998.
Expenditures on structures rose at a faster rate than in 1997, while those on machinery and equipment slowed.
Inventory investment eased considerably, mainly in the wholesale and retail trade sectors.
Department stores scaled back inventory levels to correct imbalances and as part of store closures.
The current account deficit narrowed marginally to just under 2 per cent of GDP at mid-year.
An improvement in the real trade balance was largely offset by a further deterioration in the terms of trade arising from the continuing decline in commodity prices.
Overall, aggregate demand grew at about the same rate as the economy's capacity to produce in the first half of 1998.
As a result, Bank staff estimate that the output gap - the amount of excess supply in the economy as a percentage of capacity output - was essentially unchanged from the end of 1997.
Such estimates, it should be stressed, are highly imprecise and need to be viewed as points within a wide band of confidence in a statistical sense.
Staff estimate that there is a 50 per cent probability that the output gap in the second quarter of 1998 was between and 2 per cent.
Wages, the largest component of the total costs of producing goods and services, once again rose at a moderate pace.
Annual wage settlements in the unionized private sector averaged 1.5 per cent in the first half of 1998, compared with 1.7 per cent in the second half of 1997.
Wage settlements in the public sector were a little higher, averaging 1.8 per cent in the first half of 1998.
Based on these and other measures, the underlying wage increase in the total economy is estimated to have been close to 2 per cent.
This is confirmed by wage data from Statistics Canada's Labour Force Information.
For example, the year-over-year increase in the average hourly wage, excluding overtime, for permanent workers was 2.0 per cent in the third quarter of 1998.
Productivity growth moderated in the first half of 1998, mainly because of the slowdown in output growth.
Even so, the year-over-year rise in unit labour costs remained very low because of moderate growth in labour income per person-hour.
The growth of labour income per person-hour was unusually high in early 1997 because of the timing of irregular bonus payments.
Over the past six months, the conduct of monetary policy has been influenced by: the implications for the Canadian economy of the slowdown in world economic activity and the associated decline in commodity prices; intensified turbulence and uncertainty in global financial markets; the decline of the Canadian dollar in the context of these developments; and the effect of these factors on the outlook for inflation in Canada.
The crisis that began in Southeast Asia in 1997 spread to South Korea and worsened the problems already afflicting Japan, the world's second-largest economy.
This summer, renewed political and economic turmoil in Russia further jolted confidence.
While there was an element of contagion in this chain of events, it is also the case that serious weaknesses in the emerging-market economies, particularly in their banking systems, played an important role.
In several of these countries, as well as in Japan, it is not yet clear how quickly the necessary far-reaching reforms will be implemented.
The acute uncertainties have resulted in volatile prices for all types of financial assets around the world.
A flight to quality has favoured government bond markets in the G-10 countries, while raising the premiums for credit risk in other markets.
Thus, interest rates in emerging markets have risen dramatically, and yield spreads between corporate and government bonds in the United States and Canada have widened appreciably.
These developments have also directly affected the Canadian dollar.
Because Canada's trade depends more on resources than that of our major trading partners, there was downward pressure on the Canadian dollar as commodity prices continued to fall.
From May through the first weeks of August, the dollar declined fairly steadily, for a cumulative depreciation of about 4 per cent on the G-10 index and of more than 5 per cent against the US dollar.
In the second half of August, the pace of decline picked up, and it became increasingly difficult for the market to see where the currency might eventually settle.
Extrapolative expectations began to take hold, especially as the value of the Canadian dollar in terms of the US dollar broke new lows day after day.
The increased risk premiums that emerged in Canadian interest rates became increasingly worrisome.
Long-term interest rates were rising at a time when comparable rates in the United States were falling.
Consequently, the long-term yield differential against the United States, which had been negative for a year, turned positive, and approached 50 basis points towards the end of August.
Also, short-term interest rates rose (the 90-day commercial paper rate nearing 5 per cent), even though the Bank of Canada was holding the band for the overnight interest rate at 4.5 to 5.0 per cent.
The intensification of the decline in the Canadian dollar and the rise in Canadian medium - and long-term interest rates signalled an undermining of the confidence of holders of Canadian dollar financial instruments.
The Bank initially intervened heavily in the foreign exchange market, and then on 27 August raised the International financial markets remained nervous, and considerable volatility continued in global and Canadian financial markets.
However, the Canadian dollar rallied after the Bank Rate increase, and the medium - and long-term yield spread vis--vis the United States narrowed.
Indeed, as US treasury yields continued to decline, Canadian medium - and long-term rates fell to new lows.
In turn, this allowed mortgage lenders to reduce their rates.
The improvement in Canadian financial markets stemmed largely from the improved confidence engendered by the Bank Rate increase and growing expectations of lower US rates.
When the Federal Reserve lowered its target federal funds rate by of a percentage point on 29 September, the Bank of Canada followed suit, reducing the Bank Rate to 5 per cent.
The Federal Reserve again reduced the federal funds rate by of a percentage point on 15 October.
The next day the Bank lowered the Bank Rate by a similar amount, to 5 per cent.
In summary, heightened uncertainties and a slowing economy over the past six months have affected the conduct of monetary policy in two important respects.
First, the Bank has had to place particular emphasis on calming financial markets, so that participants could focus on economic fundamentals, thus helping to restore confidence.
Second, as anticipated in the May Report, monetary conditions have fluctuated widely but, with the sizable decline in the dollar over the period, have, on balance, eased considerably.
When analyzing the outlook for inflation over the next two years, the Bank pays particular attention to the main factors that influence aggregate excess supply or demand, both current and projected.
When undertaking its analysis of economic prospects, the Bank is well aware of the uncertainty inevitably associated with its projections.
It therefore also considers projections by other organizations, as well as alternative scenarios that assess the implications of important risks to the assumptions underlying the outlook.
The situation in various Asian economies and recent developments in other emerging-market economies (such as Russia and some Latin American countries) have resulted in a downward revision to estimates of global economic growth this year and next.
However, growth is expected to be reasonably well sustained in North America, continental Europe, and the United Kingdom, given the underlying momentum in domestic demand in these economies.
Among the G-7 countries, Japan is the main exception, reflecting weakness in both macroeconomic conditions and in the banking sector.
Indeed, most of the downward revision to economic growth among industrial countries in the latest World Economic Outlook of the International Monetary Fund is the result of a much weaker outlook for Japan.
In the United States, the pace of economic expansion once again exceeded the growth in potential output during the first half of 1998.
However, the rate of increase in real GDP is expected to ease as a result of the international economic slowdown and the fallout from financial market nervousness.
US core inflation (which excludes food and energy prices) has remained between 2 and 2.5 per cent.
It is expected to change little over the next year, since the past appreciation of the US dollar and declines in commodity prices should offset any upward pressures arising from excess demand in labour markets.
In response to the economic consequences of international developments, unsettled conditions in financial markets generally, as well as a concern about credit availability resulting from cautious behaviour by lenders, the Federal Reserve lowered short-term interest rates in late September and again in mid-October.
In the context of contained inflation, these actions are designed to sustain economic growth in the United States.
Financial markets have built in expectations of further interest rate cuts.
Although the pace of recovery in the major European countries, particularly Germany, appears to have moderated around mid-year, economic growth is expected to be well sustained through the end of 1999.
In the United Kingdom, where capacity constraints have been a concern, the economic expansion has begun to slow.
In response to domestic developments and unsettled international financial markets, the Bank of England lowered its official rate by 25 basis points to 7 per cent on 8 October.
On the assumptions that monetary conditions will remain accommodative, that progress will be made on banking sector reform, and that additional fiscal policy stimulus will be undertaken, a modest recovery is expected in Japan in 1999.
Excess commodity supplies worldwide should gradually diminish.
Thus, world commodity prices are expected to begin a gradual recovery next year.
Turning to Canada, we note that developments in Japan and in many of the emerging economies, together with the anticipated slowdown in the growth of the US economy, will tend to restrain the growth of Canadian exports over the next year.
As well, Canadian shipments of commodities from high-cost sites may be further cut back until commodity prices recover significantly.
Exports of automotive products have already recovered, following the end of labour disruptions that had adversely affected operations at General Motors' Canadian facilities.
Canada's improved competitiveness is also expected to lead to more switching by Canadian business and consumers from foreign to domestic products, resulting in a further decrease in the growth of imports.
The growth of business investment is expected to slow through to the end of 1999, with the extent of the slowdown a function of the state of business confidence.
A reduction in cash flow arising from the downturn in commodity prices will likely cause resource-based firms to spend less.
Capital spending on electrical utilities in eastern Canada is also likely to fall back after being raised temporarily this year by the rebuilding of electrical transmission and distribution networks following last winter's ice storm.
Inventory investment may also be reduced further in 1999 as some firms correct stock imbalances.
While total employment has continued to expand, job gains have been concentrated in the service sector and in part-time employment, with jobs in the primary sector and in related manufacturing processing down sharply.
These developments in the labour market, together with the recent financial market turmoil, have led to a decline in consumer confidence.
If confidence does not recover quickly, an expected slowdown in household demand would likely persist through the balance of this year and well into 1999.
The latest consensus among private sector forecasters for the growth of real GDP (on an annual average basis) is 2.9 per cent this year and 2.2 per cent in 1999.In June, the consensus forecast was 3.4 per cent and 2.8 per cent for 1998 and 1999, respectively.
As already noted, it is important to stress the conditional nature of economic projections at this time because of the degree of international uncertainty.
On the assumption that domestic demand in the United States and in Europe remains on an expansionary track (as is generally anticipated), the Bank would expect GDP growth to be within a range around the consensus rate of just under 3 per cent this year.
For 1999, there are two key uncertainties - volatility in global financial markets and the policy thrust in Japan.
With progress expected to be made on both these fronts, the Bank sees growth in Canada next year in the range of 2 to 3 per cent.
The latest IMF and OECD projections for economic growth in Canada next year are just above the lower end of this range.
Projections at the upper end of the range depend primarily on a stronger response of net exports (i.e., higher exports and lower imports) to current levels of competitiveness than incorporated in most private sector forecasts.
The depreciation of the Canadian dollar against the US dollar should continue to put upward pressure on the prices of many imported goods and services over the next year or so.
Price discounting might decrease over the next year and a half, as restructuring results in less excess capacity in the retail sector.
At the same time, currency depreciations and weak economic conditions in several Asian countries may lead to greater price cutting on items such as clothing and durable goods, as retailers take advantage of cheaper foreign sources of supply.
On balance, these transitory factors should put slight upward pressure on core inflation through 1999.
For the total CPI, exchange rate effects on food prices are expected to put upward pressure on the year-over-year rate of increase through the fall and winter of 1998-99.
Wage increases are likely to be moderate over the remainder of 1998 and through 1999, owing to both low price inflation and continued excess supply in the labour market.
To the extent that productivity gains continue to be comparatively modest, the rate of increase in unit labour costs may rise slightly but should remain low.
In the regular survey reported in the Conference Board's September Index of Business Confidence, 82 per cent of respondents (compared with 86 per cent in the March 1998 survey) expected inflation to be 2 per cent or less over the near term.
The average private sector forecast for CPI inflation is 1.2 per cent this year and 1.6 per cent in 1999.
Longer-term inflation forecasts, as reported by Consensus Economics Inc., also continue to be slightly below the midpoint of the inflation-control target range.
The differential between the yield on conventional bonds and Real Return Bonds has declined further.
While this differential is affected by market liquidity and portfolio preferences, its steady decline to less than 1 per cent is evidence that investors are increasingly confident that inflation will remain low over the long run.
M1 growth has moderated.
This is attributable in part to the rise in short-term interest rates since mid-1997.
However, evolving structural factors have continued to influence M1 developments over time.
The distinction between transactions balances included in M1 and other deposits has become less marked since the phasing-out of reserve requirements.
This has permitted a shift back to current accounts, which now pay market-related rates of interest on tiered balances.
At the same time, other innovations such as debit cards, ATMs, and telephone or personal-computer banking allow non-M1 accounts to be accessed more easily for transactions purposes, which may be reducing M1 balances.
Real M1 (adjusted for inflation) has been a good leading indicator for output, and recent research suggests that M1 might also help predict longer-term developments in price levels.
Its recent growth suggests that output should continue to grow at a rate near potential and that inflation will remain inside the target range, although the innovations affecting M1, discussed in the preceding paragraph, make these projections more uncertain than before.
Over the longer run, M1 is expected to slow considerably from its recent growth rates, unless there are further significant structural developments that would make M1 balances more attractive.
Given the enormous shift from deposits to mutual funds in the 1990s, it is probably most informative for this purpose to look at the very broad aggregate M2++, which includes all mutual funds sold in Canada.
(The adjusted M2+ aggregate includes only those funds sponsored by the deposit-taking institutions.)
M2++ has been growing fairly steadily at a rate of about 8 per cent, which appears consistent with continued low inflation.
Three factors should contribute to some further modest increase in core inflation to the end of 1999.
First, longer-term inflation expectations are somewhat above actual inflation.
Second, some of the downward pressure on prices arising from intense competition in the retail sector should ease over the period.
Finally, the recent depreciation of the Canadian dollar against the US dollar will tend to raise prices.
Several influences, however, will work to keep core inflation below the 2 per cent midpoint of the target range: slack in product and labour markets; low increases in unit labour costs; and reductions in the price of imports from Japan and various emerging-market economies in Asia.
In summary, the Bank expects core inflation to rise to about 1 per cent at the end of 1998 and then to be fairly steady in a range between 1 and 1 per cent over the course of 1999.
Over the past six months, economic projections for Canada have been lowered significantly because of the adverse consequences of international developments.
Moreover, the ongoing uncertainties associated with these developments have placed a wider-than-usual confidence band around all projections.
Based on a view of sustained domestic demand in the United States and accommodative monetary conditions in Canada, the Bank expects that both external and domestic demand will continue to contribute to an expanding Canadian economy over the next year.
However, given the importance of financial stability for underpinning household and business confidence, the extent to which growth will take up slack over this period will depend on how quickly international and domestic financial markets stabilize.
An important consideration for the Bank over the near term will therefore be to help preserve confidence among investors in Canadian financial markets.
Over the medium term, the fundamental focus of monetary policy remains on keeping the trend of inflation inside the Bank's target range of 1 to 3 per cent.
As described in the Report, we expect inflation over the period to the end of 1999 to remain in the lower half of the target range.
Six months ago, at the time of the last Monetary Policy Report, the global economic and financial environment was volatile and highly uncertain because of the adverse situation in Asia and the fallout from the Russian debt moratorium.
Many emerging-market economies, particularly in Latin America, were hit by large capital outflows.
And, as nervous investors sought safe havens, interest rate spreads on emerging-market debt widened dramatically, as did those between corporate and government bonds in the industrial countries.
Interest rate cuts by central banks in all major countries have helped to rebuild investor confidence.
In Southeast Asia, financial markets have stabilized, progress is being made on structural reforms, and prospects are good for a gradual recovery through this year and next.
In Brazil, the authorities have taken major steps to address their difficulties, including the move to a flexible exchange rate regime and a revised International Monetary Fund program linked to strong fiscal measures.
And financial markets now seem to be better able to assess and differentiate among credit risks.
Nevertheless, there are still significant risks and uncertainties facing the global economy.
Capital flows back into emerging-market economies are tentative, awaiting full implementation of announced policies in a number of key countries.
At the same time, there is a marked divergence in economic performance among the G-7 countries.
The Japanese economy remains in deep recession, and the latest indicators for Europe point to a slowdown in the pace of activity.
The US economy, in sharp contrast, continues to flourish, outperforming most expectations.
In Canada, the economy has regained momentum over the past six months, supported by the robust US economy, accommodative monetary conditions, and recovery from several temporary production disruptions last summer.
Over this period, core inflation has remained near the bottom of the Bank's target range of 1 to 3 per cent, at levels slightly lower than expected.
The calmer international financial environment has enabled the Bank to refocus its attention on keeping inflation inside the target range and to completely unwind the 100-basis-point increase in short-term interest rates that was necessary last August to address investor nervousness.
The reduction was accomplished in four steps of 25 basis points each between September 1998 and March 1999.
On 4 May, the Bank lowered short-term interest rates by an additional 25 basis points to support continued economic expansion and to keep the trend of inflation comfortably inside the target range next year.
Currently, an important issue for the Bank is the uncertainty surrounding estimates of the economy's capacity to produce goods and services.
The large investments in technology in recent years, as well as various measures undertaken to improve product and labour markets, should have had a positive effect on the economy's production capacity.
However, it is difficult to assess the magnitude of this effect.
Core inflation (CPI excluding food, energy, and the effect of changes in indirect taxes) has remained near the bottom of the Bank's inflation-control target range over the past six months, at levels slightly lower than expected.
The 12-month rate of increase in the core CPI was 1.2 per cent in March, unchanged from last September.
Two other statistical measures of the trend rate of inflation (CPIX and CPIW) are close to the level of core inflation.
Several factors continue to put downward pressure on core inflation.
Slack in product markets has been the principal influence, together with modest increases in unit labour costs.
In addition, price cutting for long-distance telephone service and computer products has been particularly intense recently.
This reflects technological change, deregulation in the telecommunications industry, and lower costs for imported computer components.
The extent of this price cutting has been larger than anticipated.
At the same time, two factors offset the downward pressure on inflation.
First, longer-term expectations of inflation close to the middle of the inflation-control target range helped to hold core inflation up.
Second, the decline of about 10 per cent in the value of the Canadian dollar against the US dollar from the autumn of 1997 to late 1998 resulted in higher import prices for most non-energy consumer goods and services over the past year.
To date, however, these increases have had only a limited impact on consumer prices.
In addition, possibly because of the keen competition in the retail sector, the pass-through from higher import prices to consumer prices has been slightly less than expected.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was 1.0 per cent in March, compared with 0.7 per cent in September.
Retail energy prices have stopped declining (on a year-over-year basis) since crude oil prices have begun to rise.
The chain price index for GDP, a broad measure of the price level of goods and services produced in Canada, has edged down over the past year.
This partly reflected the effect of falling world prices for the commodities that Canada exports.
The year-over-year increases in the chain price indexes for both consumer products and business fixed investment picked up a little in the second half of 1998 as a result of higher import costs from the depreciation of the Canadian dollar.
Non-energy commodity prices continued to fall during the second half of 1998, reflecting further weakness in global demand, primarily because of developments in Japan and in various emerging markets, as well as continued growth in supply.
For example, larger-than-expected harvests contributed to lower grain prices, while increased supply led to a marked reduction in livestock prices.
The excess-supply situation in metals markets (stemming from sharply reduced Asian and Russian demand) has been exacerbated by new mine capacity that has come on stream over the past two years.
But, driven by strong US demand and supply adjustments, prices for non-energy commodities have recovered somewhat since the end of 1998.
The inability of major oil producers to cut back oil production in the face of weak demand led to further marked decreases in crude oil prices through to the end of 1998.
In March, however, oil prices rebounded, following an agreement between OPEC and other producers to cap production.
The aggregate industrial product price index for the manufacturing sector has increased modestly over the past year.
In contrast, the Canadian dollar prices of many exports of finished goods with longer-term contracts in US dollars rose with the Canadian dollar's depreciation against the US dollar.
The pace of economic activity in Canada picked up substantially in the fourth quarter of 1998 and early 1999 after being hampered by labour disruptions and international developments in mid-1998.
Significant support came from stronger growth in the US economy and from domestic monetary conditions that were generally accommodative over the last year.
Together, these factors were enough to offset the drag from low commodity prices.
In the second half of 1998, real GDP rose at an annual rate of about 3 per cent.
Information to date suggests that it grew at a rate of about 4 per cent in the first quarter of 1999.
In the second half of 1998 and in early 1999, export volumes expanded strongly.
Growth in exports of motor vehicles and parts was especially robust.
This reflected a very high degree of US demand, efforts to replenish US automotive stocks following labour disruptions at General Motors, new Canadian production capacity coming on stream, and the end of some difficulties in rail transport.
Continued vigorous growth in US demand and a favourable competitive position also led to marked gains in Canada's exports of both lumber and machinery and equipment.
However, exports of other commodities continued to fall as Asian demand remained weak, and unusually mild US weather conditions in the fourth quarter curbed the demand for oil and natural gas.
Household expenditures rose at a more moderate pace in the second half of 1998, reflecting reduced employment growth between the first and third quarters of the year as well as turbulent international and domestic financial markets in the late summer and early autumn.
Towards the end of the year, however, consumer confidence turned around, owing to a surge in job creation (which continued into early 1999), an associated reduction in unemployment despite higher labour force participation, and increased stability in financial markets.
These factors have contributed to renewed growth in household spending in early 1999.
Growth of spending on capital goods by businesses also eased considerably in the last half of 1998 from the strong rates experienced over the previous year and a half.
This reduction was partly caused by a drop in business confidence in the autumn, arising from volatile financial markets and other adverse international developments.
The substantial drop in commodity prices reduced incentives to expand capacity and decreased cash flows to finance exploration and expansion.
The oil and gas sector was particularly hard hit as were other resource-based industries, and their capital spending declined considerably last year.
Over the second half of 1998 (and therefore disregarding most of the swing associated with the GM strike), inventory investment continued to decline, with the decrease concentrated in several industries that manufacture durable goods.
Part of the reduction in inventory accumulation may have resulted from unexpectedly strong exports of manufactured goods to the United States.
The improved competitiveness of Canadian producers contributed to some substitution of domestic production for imports.
At 2.3 per cent of GDP, the current account deficit (in dollar terms) at the end of 1998 was essentially unchanged from a year earlier.
In volume terms, the trade balance improved considerably.
This was partly offset by a continuing decrease in the terms of trade as commodity prices fell further.
Moreover, Canada's investment income account deteriorated as net dividend payments rose considerably, and interest payments on foreign-currency debt increased.
Overall, aggregate demand grew somewhat faster than the estimate of the economy's capacity to produce in the second half of 1998.
Consequently, Bank staff estimate that the output gap narrowed from about 1.75 per cent at mid-year to about 1.25 per cent at the end of the year.
Estimates of the output gap continue to be highly imprecise, partly because of revisions as new data become available and partly because of restructuring, large investments in technology, and changes to the way the labour market functions, all of which should have improved the economy's capacity to produce.
Wage gains were again moderate in the second half of 1998.
Wage settlements in the public sector were marginally lower, averaging 1.4 per cent in the second half of 1998.
Data from Statistics Canada's Labour Force Information suggest that the year-over-year increase in the average hourly wage (excluding overtime) for permanent workers was 1.9 per cent in the first quarter of 1999.
Thus, the underlying wage increase in the total economy has remained close to 2 per cent.
Current data indicate that labour productivity was largely unchanged through 1998, which is surprising in light of the robust output growth.
However, the continuation of moderate growth in labour income per person-hour meant that the year-over-year rise in unit labour costs also remained relatively modest.
Since last autumn, the Bank reduced the Bank Rate by 25 basis points on three occasions (18 November, 31 March, and 4 May).
This brought the operating band for the overnight interest rate to 4 1/4 - 4 3/4 per cent.
The first two of these cuts (together with two earlier ones in September and October 1998) fully reversed the one-percentage-point increase prompted by the financial turbulence last August.
The most recent cut was designed to support continued economic expansion and to keep the trend of inflation comfortably inside the Bank's inflation-control target range next year.
The decline in the Bank Rate and other short-term interest rates occurred in the context of a series of interest rate cuts by central banks in all major countries and an improved environment in financial markets, including those for assets denominated in Canadian dollars.
Investors have become less anxious and, as a result, risk and liquidity premiums have declined from the unusually high levels reached last autumn.
In the Canadian money market, this is evident in the narrower yield spread between commercial paper and treasury bills.
Since the start of the year, both the Canadian and US dollars have risen quite strongly against the newly introduced euro and other overseas currencies.
This reflects the divergent economic developments between North America and the major overseas countries.
With the bilateral Canada/US exchange rate also stronger, the Bank's C-6 trade-weighted index for the Canadian dollar has risen.
Canadian bond yields, after spiking at the time of the Russian crisis last August, have fallen to levels that are very low historically.
In the United States, however, Treasury bond yields have risen from the lows reached last autumn.
This reflects two important factors: first, the reversal of capital inflows from investors seeking the safe haven of US government securities; and second, the unexpected strength of the US economy in the fourth quarter of 1998 and the first quarter of 1999.
Despite the recent increase in yields, US interest rates at all maturities are still below those of a year ago.
Partly as a result of this development, US equity prices have shown renewed vigour and have reached new record highs.
Canada/US bond differentials have declined markedly over the most recent period.
Negative differentials have been re-established as last summer's sharp increase in risk premiums has unwound.
The sustained low inflation rate in Canada has underpinned the decline in yield spreads.
Money market interest rates have also fallen to levels below those in the United States.
As anticipated in the November 1998 Report, the monetary conditions index has continued to be volatile, primarily because of fluctuations in the trade-weighted exchange value of the Canadian dollar.
For the most part, the MCI has ranged between -8 and -7, as currency appreciation and interest rate declines worked in opposite directions.
With the strengthening trend in the dollar, the index has recently risen to close to the -6 mark.
The Bank analyzes the outlook for inflation over the coming two years by focusing on the principal factors that influence aggregate excess supply or demand, both current and projected.
The Bank is well aware of the uncertainty involved in any projection.
For this reason, it looks at alternative scenarios that assess risks to the assumptions underlying the outlook and at a range of projections by other organizations.
The situation in emerging-market economies, while still fragile, has improved over the past six months.
In Brazil, the financial situation worsened towards the end of 1998, owing to growing investor concern about its budget and current account deficits.
More recently, circumstances there have improved considerably as a result of tight fiscal policy and a new IMF program approved in March.
Other Latin American countries have been affected by the Brazilian situation, and growth prospects for this region in 1999 have consequently been revised downwards.
The emerging-market economies as a group have been making progress in addressing their problems through appropriate domestic policies, and this has contributed to a calmer climate in international financial markets.
This is apparent in risk premiums in interest rates, which rose sharply last autumn and have since declined.
They remain relatively high, however, and the situation in some of these countries is still a source of anxiety for investors.
The IMF expects that the improvement in financial markets will lead to an increase in net private capital flows to emerging markets in 1999.
The global economic environment is still uncertain, however.
In striking contrast, the US economy has shown surprising strength.
The Japanese economy contracted substantially throughout 1998 and is expected to remain in recession through most of 1999, despite additional fiscal and monetary stimulus.
Even though an appreciation of the yen relative to the US dollar since last August and a rise in long-term interest rates more recently will act to restrain aggregate demand somewhat, a modest recovery is possible next year, particularly if progress continues on banking sector reform.
The pace of recovery in the major European countries, particularly Germany and the United Kingdom, has slowed markedly since mid-1998.
Forecasts of growth in the euro area for 1999 have been revised to below potential, reflecting weaker prospects both for exports to emerging markets and for spending by businesses, which have become more pessimistic.
In light of low current and projected inflation, the European Central Bank cut interest rates by 50 basis points in early April.
This action should provide some support for the euro area over the coming year.
In spite of the rapid pace of economic expansion in the United States, where the level of output exceeds most estimates of potential capacity, there has been no sign of intensifying inflationary pressures.
The Federal Reserve lowered short-term interest rates between September and mid-November in reaction to tightening domestic credit conditions and to concerns over the implications of the global situation for the US economy.
However, after the surprising sharp expansion of final sales in the fourth quarter of last year and the first quarter of this year, most analysts have raised their forecasts for 1999.
The rate of increase in real GDP, although it should remain fairly robust, is still expected to slow as spending on housing, consumer durables, and producers' equipment moderates to bring holdings of these assets more in line with underlying trends in income and output.
Exports also fell back in the first quarter after very strong growth in the fourth quarter of 1998.
US core inflation (which excludes food and energy prices) has been contained between 2 and 2.5 per cent.
It is not expected to change significantly during 1999, since the past appreciation of the US dollar and past declines in commodity prices should offset any upward pressures from excess demand in labour and product markets.
On balance, world commodity prices are expected to edge up during 1999, as excess global supplies gradually diminish.
The anticipated US slowdown and sluggish growth overseas will tend to limit the potential for growth in Canadian exports in 1999.
In addition, Canadian shipments of commodities from high-cost sites may be cut back further until commodity prices recover significantly.
This improved competitive position should also prompt Canadian businesses and consumers to substitute domestic products for their foreign counterparts.
This, combined with the small projected increase in spending on import-intensive components of domestic demand, should cause import growth to decline.
Indeed, in the past, persistent movements in the real exchange rate have generally led to considerable change in real net exports, though with variable lags.
Thus, the substantial depreciation of the Canadian dollar against the US dollar since late 1997, combined with Canada's good price and cost performance relative to its trading partners, augurs well for significant gains in real net exports in 1999.
Business investment is expected to grow modestly during 1999.
The latest survey of investment intentions, conducted by Statistics Canada in late 1998 and early 1999, calls for a small decline in business investment this year.
Oil and gas firms, pressed by a sharp reduction in cash flow caused by the downturn in energy prices, were planning further cuts in capital spending.
Initial investment intentions, however, are often substantially revised later in the year.
This could quite likely happen this year, given that the survey was begun in October when global financial markets were still very turbulent.
Firms are likely to have undertaken most of their planned investment in computerized machinery and equipment in the first half of this year.
Early in 1999, growth in household spending showed signs of recovery from its sluggish year-end pace.
This is expected to continue, given gains in employment, further improvement in consumer confidence, and lower income tax rates by mid-year.
These effects may be tempered, however, by efforts to rebuild savings.
Domestic demand should also be boosted this year by the provisions of the February 1999 federal budget, which suggest a marked pickup in health-related government spending.
Overall, in this period of relative uncertainty, any forecasts of economic growth have been subject to significant and frequent revision.
Recently, most forecasters have upgraded their outlook for Canadian economic growth in 1999 in reaction to the momentum in the US economy, rising domestic full-time employment, and a calmer international financial climate.
The latest consensus among private sector forecasters for the growth of real GDP (on an annual average basis) is 2.8 per cent in 1999.
The Bank, for similar reasons, has also raised its projection by one-half of a percentage point to a range of 2.75 to 3.75 per cent.
The strength of this projection, relative to the consensus outlook, depends primarily on a stronger response of net exports (i.e., higher exports and lower imports) to current levels of competitiveness than is incorporated in most private sector forecasts.
In 2000, the Bank expects the economy to expand at a similar pace to that of 1999, whereas, the latest consensus forecast calls for growth of only 2.3 per cent.
In the Bank's projection, increases in aggregate demand would imply that the margin of unused capacity (estimated by the Bank using its traditional techniques) would be absorbed over the next four to six quarters.
However, because of the uncertainties surrounding these current estimates, the Bank will need to place increasing weight on a number of other indicators of pressures on production capacity and inflation.
Variations in the value of the Canadian dollar affect consumer prices with lags that depend partly upon market conditions.
Thus, past exchange rate movements are expected to continue to put some upward pressure on consumer prices this year.
At the same time, the exceptional rate of price declines for long-distance telephone service and computer products should soon slow.
These developments should result in slight upward pressure on core inflation through 1999.
The most recent marked gains in crude oil prices are also expected to put upward pressure on the total CPI in coming months.
Wage increases are likely to be moderate through 1999, owing to both low price inflation and continued excess supply in the labour market.
Since productivity gains are expected to pick up somewhat, the rate of increase in unit labour costs should be quite Expectations of inflation are influenced both by recent developments in inflation and by the credibility of the Bank's inflation-control strategy.
In the regular survey reported in the Conference Board's spring Index of Business Confidence, 92 per cent of respondents expected inflation to be 2 per cent or less over the near term.
Over the last two years, an increasing percentage of respondents have been looking for inflation of 1 per cent or less.
The average private sector forecast for CPI inflation, as reported by Consensus Economics Inc., is 1.1 per cent in 1999 and 1.6 per cent in 2000.
Forecasts of long-term inflation are at the midpoint of the inflation-control target range.
The yield differential between conventional long-term government bonds and Real Return Bonds has been declining for four years and recently hit a record low of 1 per cent.
This indicates a high level of confidence among long-term investors that inflation will remain low.
Narrow money growth slowed in the fourth quarter of 1998.
This resulted partly from the higher interest rates on other assets, which would have attracted funds from transactions-type balances.
Also, with the increased aversion to risk in credit markets last autumn, credit extended to businesses slowed.
Some firms, facing a reduced supply of credit, may have been obliged to run down existing stocks of cash balances to finance their outlays.
As interest rates settled down and conditions in the financial sector stabilized, the growth of both business credit and M1 picked up in the first quarter of 1999.
On the basis of historical relationships, the recent rates of increase in M1 imply a growth rate of economic activity in the first half of 1999 of about 3 per cent.
This very inclusive aggregate internalizes movements between deposits and mutual funds.
These movements, which have been substantial over the past few years, have made the previous measures of broad money more difficult to interpret.
In particular, the huge shift from deposits into equity and bond mutual funds causes aggregates such as M2 and M2+ to understate the expansion of holdings of liquid assets.
M2++ continues to grow at a rate between 7 and 8 per cent - a rate that has been maintained for several years.
This is consistent withinflation remaining low in 1999.
Although inflation has been slightly lower than the Bank projected last November, over the next 18 months three factors are expected to continue to contribute to an increase in core inflation.
First, temporary factors that have recently contributed to keeping core inflation low are expected to abate.
In particular, the rapid decline in long-distance telephone rates and computer prices experienced over the past year is expected to slow.
Second, the pass-through of the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar against the US dollar will tend to raise prices, thus adding temporarily to the measure of inflation.
And third, as activity in the economy approaches production capacity, inflation should move towards longer-term expectations.
Nevertheless, the increase in core inflation is expected to occur only gradually for several reasons: slack in product and labour markets will be taken up slowly; increases in unit labour costs should remain low; expectations for inflation are slightly below 2 per cent; and competition may remain intense in many markets.
In summary, on the basis of a growth rate of GDP in the middle of the range of 2.75 to 3.75 per cent and assuming that the Bank's estimates of the output gap are broadly correct, core inflation should rise gradually over the course of the next 18 months but remain in the lower half of the target range.
The turbulence that characterized international markets last autumn has subsided, investor confidence is being restored, and the US economy has been remarkably robust.
Hence, most projections for the Canadian economy have been revised upwards.
The Bank is now looking for a rate of economic expansion between 2.75 and 3.75 per cent in 1999 and a similar pace in 2000.
Based on this projection, the Bank anticipates that core inflation in Canada will gradually move up over the next year and a half, but remain in the lower half of the Bank's inflation-control target range.
The risks to this outlook for the economy and inflation appear to be balanced.
The conditional nature of the projection must still be stressed, however, since significant uncertainties remain.
A leading risk to the world economic outlook revolves around the divergent economic performances of the major industrial countries.
On the domestic side, there is the uncertainty regarding estimates of the capacity of the Canadian economy to produce goods and services and thus of the margin of unused capacity.
This means that the Bank must place increasing weight on a range of indicators to assess the degree of pressure on the economy's production capacity.
These indicators would include inflation relative to expectations, the growth of money and credit, wage settlements, evidence of supply bottlenecks, and information provided by the Bank's regional representatives.
Since the May Report, the international economic environment has continued to improve.
Economic activity abroad grew faster than expected, while inflation in the major economies remained subdued.
Japanese output increased sharply, following two years of severe recession.
In Europe, growth picked up, and a number of the Asian economies that bore the brunt of the 1997-98 financial crisis have staged a remarkable recovery.
The US economy again showed surprisingly strong increases in spending and output, as well as low inflation, despite tight labour market conditions and high levels of economic activity.
Against this background, Canada's exports grew strongly.
Domestic spending also gained momentum, and the margin of unused capacity in the economy declined.
Inflation increased moderately, moving towards the middle of the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent target range, and inflation expectations seem to be settling around this level.
With core inflation in the lower half of the target range and a degree of slack in the economy, the Bank of Canada kept its target for the overnight interest rate unchanged.
In determining the future conduct of monetary policy in Canada, two key issues will have to be faced.
First, there is the risk of a buildup of inflation pressures in the United States and the implications for Canada.
Second is the momentum of demand in the Canadian economy from both domestic and international sources, combined with the uncertainty surrounding estimates of the potential level of output.
These issues will require the Bank to pay very close attention to a wide range of coincident and leading indicators of pressures on inflation in order to make timely policy judgments.
In the last six months, core inflation (CPI excluding food, energy, and the effect of changes in indirect taxes) has moved upwards from the lower part of the Bank's inflation-control target range towards the midpoint.
This move was broadly in line with expectations but occurred more quickly than expected because of the timing of certain transitory factors.
The 12-month rate of increase in the core CPI was 1.9 per cent in September, compared with 1.2 per cent last March.
Two other statistical measures of the trend rate of inflation (CPIX and CPIW) are currently at the same level as core inflation.
Several developments contributed to the rise in core inflation over the past six months.
Prices for most imported consumer goods and services rose markedly as a result of the depreciation of the Canadian dollar between the autumn of 1997 and the latter part of 1998, contributing significantly to higher consumer prices.
Core inflation continued to be held up by the general expectation that longer-term inflation would be close to the middle of the inflation-control target range.
The brisk pace of price cuts for both computer products and long-distance telephone service, which has been an important feature of overall price developments, began to slow.
In addition, airfares rose considerably and unexpectedly, partly because of sharply higher fuel prices.
At the same time, two fundamental influences limited the increase in core inflation.
Some slack in product and labour markets was present throughout this period, and unit labour costs have been largely unchanged over the past year.
Sharp gains in the prices of both gasoline and natural gas pushed the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI up significantly to 2.6 per cent in September, from 1.0 per cent in March.
This increase should be temporary, given that international oil prices are no longer under upward pressure.
Total CPI should therefore move down towards the core inflation rate through next year.
Increased prices for the commodities that Canada exports led a recovery in the chain price index for GDP over the first half of 1999 after its decline in 1998.
This economy-wide measure of prices rose by 1.0 per cent during the past year.
Price gains continued to be modest for both consumer expenditures (similar to those recorded in the CPI) and business fixed investment.
World commodity prices have rebounded considerably since the end of 1998 because of firmer global demand and some restrictions in supply.
Metals prices rose sharply over this period, reflecting an increase in Asian and European demand as well as production cutbacks for certain metals.
Crude oil prices surged between March and September with news of major cutbacks by OPEC and several non-OPEC producers, as well as mounting demand in the United States.
In contrast, market conditions for many foodstuffs remain soft because of abundant supplies.
The Bridge/CRB index, a broad index of commodity prices followed by many analysts, has recently performed sluggishly compared with the significant rise in the Bank of Canada's commodity price index.
This results mainly from the weakness in the price of food products combined with a weight on these products that is much greater in the CRB index than in the Canadian economy.
Canada's economy expanded robustly in the first three quarters of 1999, continuing to take up slack.
Monetary conditions remained accommodative, US aggregate demand was exceptionally strong, and the Asian economy and world commodity markets began to turn around.
As a result, Canada's real GDP (based on national accounts data) rose at an annual rate of 3.8 per cent in the first half of 1999, compared with 2.8 per cent between the fourth quarter of 1997 and the fourth quarter of 1998.
Growth in the third quarter of 1999 is expected to be even more robust than in the first half, as indicated by strong quarterly automobile sales as well as by healthy retail sales and production in July and Household expenditures rose much more strongly in the first six months of 1999 than in the second half of 1998.
As a result, the personal savings rate declined further, reaching a very low level by mid-1999.
(The overall national savings rate has, however, shown a rising trend since 1992.)
Better job prospects brought workers back into the labour force, and participation rates rose for both sexes at all age levels.
Even so, since mid-1998 the unemployment rate has decreased by 1.2 percentage points.
Business investment in capital goods increased very strongly in the first half of 1999, as business confidence recovered in light of favourable international developments.
In addition, the intense pace of price-cutting for computers that began in mid-1998 and the need to upgrade systems to ensure year-2000 compliance contributed to a surge in purchases of computers and other office equipment.
Inventory investment began to recover in the first half of the year.
Firms tried to restore stocks to normal levels following the unanticipated strength in exports of manufactured goods to the United States in late 1998.
With more rapid growth in domestic demand, particularly for import-intensive items such as machinery and equipment, import volumes rose much more strongly in the first half of 1999 than in the second half of 1998.
Canadian export growth, while continuing at a strong pace, was not quite as vigorous as that recorded in the second half of 1998.
In that earlier period, exports had been driven by a marked expansion in US activity, partly the result of efforts to restore stocks of motor vehicles to more normal levels following labour disruptions.
Overall, however, the favourable competitive position of Canadian industry continued to be an important factor supporting export growth.
Because export growth was outstripped by import growth, the merchandise trade surplus, in volume terms, decreased markedly in the first half of 1999.
The terms of trade improved substantially, however, mainly because of the recovery in commodity prices.
Thus, the current account deficit (in dollar terms) narrowed considerably to around 1/2 per cent of GDP.
Wages, the largest component in the total cost of producing goods and services, have tended to rise at a somewhat higher rate in 1999.
Over the first eight months of this year, annual wage settlements in the unionized private sector averaged 2.2 per cent, compared with 1.8 per cent in the second half of 1998.
Public sector wage settlements averaged 1.9 per cent.
The average rate of wage increases in the unionized sector was affected by substantial settlements in skilled occupations where demand is strong, such as nursing and computer technology.
Statistics Canada's Labour Force Information reports that the year-over-year increase in the average hourly wage (excluding overtime) for permanent workers was 2.1 per cent in the second quarter of 1999 and 2.6 per cent in the third quarter, compared with 1.8 per cent in the fourth quarter of 1998.
Thus, the underlying wage increase in the total economy was in the 2 to 2.5 per cent range.
This pickup in wage growth is occurring, however, at the same time as a resumption in the growth of labour productivity.
Indeed, with only a modest increase in labour income per person-hour, partly because of a compositional shift towards lower-paid workers, the productivity pickup led to unit labour costs edging down on a year-over-year basis.
Over time, labour income (adjusted for underlying inflation) would be expected to rise at a rate related to the trend in labour productivity growth.
Output grew faster in the first half of 1999 than the estimated rate of expansion in the economy's capacity to produce.
As a result, the Bank's traditional estimate of the output gap - the amount of excess supply in the economy as a percentage of capacity output - narrowed from about 1.0 per cent at the end of 1998 to about 0.25 per cent at mid-1999.
However, as we have emphasized before, estimates of the output gap must always be viewed cautiously.
There is also a high degree of uncertainty about the effects on potential output of such factors as low inflation, large investments in technology and new machinery and equipment, and various policy measures that have made product and labour markets more flexible.
As outlined in the last Report, when the economy is thought to be operating near capacity, and given the uncertainty about measures of potential output and the output gap, close attention must be paid to a wide set of indicators of pressures on capacity and on inflation, including movements of core inflation relative to expectations.
The indicators that have been discussed in this section do not point to any significant increase in pressures over the past six months.
The Bank of Canada has held the Bank Rate at 4.75 per cent since May, following three reductions over the preceding six months.
There has, nevertheless, been a move upward in money market rates, reflecting actual and expected increases in US short-term interest rates as well as market sentiment that Canada would follow suit.
The US Federal Reserve announced quarter-point increases in its target rate for federal funds on 30 June and on 24 August, raising the rate to 5.25 per cent.
These actions were taken to reduce the risk of rising inflation because demand had grown at a surprisingly rapid pace and the markets for many goods and services were already very tight.
In addition, the financial strains that had prompted lower interest rates in 1998 had eased.
At its 5 October meeting, the Federal Open Market Committee left the target funds rate unchanged, but indicated that it was alert for evidence of inflation pressures and that more tightening might become necessary.
Given the strength of spending in the United States, an increase in US short-term rates had been anticipated in bond markets, where yields had been rising since the start of the year.
Medium - and longer-term interest rates continued to rise during the summer and early autumn, with yields on long-term US government bonds rising above 6 per cent.
Yields in Europe have also risen, reflecting the view that economic growth there is strengthening.
Bond yields have increased more in Canada than in the United States, and negative spreads have largely disappeared.
This increase in bond rates has also affected the mortgage market.
Between May and October, the cost of 1 - and 5-year mortgages at major lending institutions in Canada increased by about 100 basis points.
Demand for mortgage loans, however, has remained strong.
Wider negative short-term interest rate spreads that followed the increases in US short-term interest rates have worked against the Canadian dollar.
At the same time, however, it has been supported by strengthening commodity markets and the improving current account of the balance of payments, as well as by the strong fundamentals of the Canadian economy.
Over the same period, the US dollar has tended to weaken.
For example, because of unexpectedly large increases in output in Japan, the yen jumped sharply.
The net effect of these currency movements on the Bank's C-6 trade-weighted index for the Canadian dollar was a decline of about 2 per cent between May and October.
With the increase in short-term interest rates and the fluctuations in the Canadian dollar, the Bank's monetary conditions index has varied between -7.0 and -6.0 over the past six months.
The Bank of Canada and Canadian financial institutions have prepared thoroughly for the year-2000 date change.
The Bank of Canada, like other central banks, has announced contingency arrangements for the period leading up to the transition to the new year and immediately thereafter.
These measures, combined with the preparations of financial institutions, will provide Canadian households, financial institutions, and businesses with a further measure of confidence that extraordinary demands for currency or liquidity will be met, and should effectively counter unusual financial pressures.
Participants in the financial markets have been taking precautions to avoid technical problems, and these have been absorbed without undue strain in markets.
For example, many large borrowers have switched to longer-term financing, putting some upward pressure on corporate-government yield differentials and swap spreads.
In short-term money markets and derivatives markets, actions to avoid exposures during the first business days of the new year were reflected in a small increase in 3-month interbank rates at the end of September.
These movements in financial market prices have not, however, been large enough to have any significant effect on economic activity.
And the contingency arrangements mentioned above should prevent significant movement in interest rates in response to year-end pressures.
Overall, our analysis suggests that the most likely outcome over the next 18 months is for little change in core inflation.
However, there are a number of risks to this projection.
Although growth in emerging-market economies will remain relatively weak this year, it is now expected to be stronger than originally anticipated and should pick up significantly in 2000.
The economic outlook for the major industrial countries is, on balance, encouraging and shows less divergence among countries than at the time of the last Report.
In Japan, real GDP rose considerably in the first half of 1999, partly as a result of fiscal stimulus.
Nevertheless, not all indicators suggest that a sustainable recovery in private sector demand has taken hold.
As a result, it will be important that economic policies continue to promote expansion.
Economic growth in the major European countries remained below the growth in potential output in the first half of 1999.
The euro area should see some improvement over the next year and a half, chiefly reflecting the past easing in monetary conditions.
In the United States, the overall pace of economic expansion is expected to remain robust through year-end.
However, a slowdown in economic growth to a more sustainable pace is projected starting early next year.
US core inflation (which excludes food and energy prices) has been close to 2 per cent in recent months.
But, on balance, economic developments point to the risk of core inflation beginning to rise by early next year.
These factors include continuing excess demand in labour markets, as well as supply bottlenecks in some areas, the recent depreciation of the US dollar, and rising commodity prices.
While easing in some world prices of commodities important for Canada is anticipated over the next few months, prices are expected to recover further during 2000 as demand continues to rise and restrictions on supply persist.
By the middle of next year, crude oil prices are likely to fall back from their current high levels as major oil producers increase production.
Our outlook for the Canadian economy is based on the US forecast described above that involves a recovery in the second half of 1999 from the temporary slowdown in the second quarter, but then a significant easing to more sustainable growth rates in 2000.
Canadian exports are likely to show stronger growth in the second half of 1999, given the anticipated increase in the growth of the US economy and the recovery in commodity prices.
Next year, however, export growth should ease in line with the expected slowdown of the US economy, although this should be tempered by the improved economic outlook for Europe and Japan and by Canada's strong competitiveness.
Import growth should also slow during the next 18 months - the result of Canada's solid competitive position and an easing in the strong demand for import-intensive goods.
Business investment is expected to decline slightly in the second half of 1999, following the substantial investments made this year to deal with year-2000 concerns.
But investment should expand at a modest rate next year as the recovery in commodity prices improves cash flows.
The outlook for the growth of household spending calls for some slowing towards the end of this year, partly as a result of efforts to rebuild savings.
Increased growth in household expenditures in 2000 will depend on continued gains in employment.
While both businesses and households might temporarily boost purchases towards the end of 1999 to minimize the effects of any supply disruptions associated with the year-2000 date change, the effects are likely to be small.
The latest consensus among private sector forecasters for the growth of real GDP (on an annual average basis) has been revised up significantly to 3.6 per cent this year and 2.9 per cent in 2000.
At the time of the last Report, the consensus forecast was 2.8 per cent and 2.3 per cent, respectively.
These trends are broadly consistent with the Bank's view, as expressed in the summer issue of our quarterly Review, that real GDP growth in 1999 would be near the top of the 2.75 to 3.75 per cent range that we projected in the May Report.
For next year, with a slowdown in the US economy and continued momentum of Canadian domestic demand, the Bank sees output growth in Canada in 2000 in a range of 2.75 to 3.75 per cent.
This projection, together with estimates of potential output using traditional techniques, would suggest that the Canadian economy would be operating at, or slightly above, full capacity in 2000.
With the projected level of activity close to the economy's estimated output capacity and because capacity estimates are uncertain, the Bank has begun to put emphasis on the range of indicators discussed in Technical Box 4 in this Report to ensure a full and careful assessment of the degree of pressure on capacity and on inflation.
In the regular survey reported in the Conference Board's autumn Index of Business Confidence, 85 per cent of respondents expected inflation to be 2 per cent or less over the near term.
The percentage of respondents anticipating inflation of 1 per cent or less has fallen sharply since last spring.
As well, some 95 per cent of the firms surveyed this autumn by the Bank of Canada's regional representatives expect inflation to remain in the 1 to 3 per cent range.
The average private sector forecast for CPI inflation is 1.6 per cent in 1999 and 2.0 per cent in 2000.
Typical forecasts of longer-term inflation are between 1.7 and 1.9 per cent, depending on the horizon.
Over the past half-year, the yield differential between conventional and Real Return bonds has widened to above 2 per cent, after drifting down for several years.
This widening reflected the rise in long-term nominal interest rates, since yields on Real Return Bonds have been stable.
An adjustment of expectations towards the centre of the inflation-control target range might be partly responsible for this change.
The depreciation of the Canadian dollar against the US dollar that took place from the autumn of 1997 to the autumn of 1998 is expected to continue to hold inflation up until late 2000, although at a rapidly diminishing rate.
At the same time, the high rates of price reduction for long-distance telephone service and computer products that prevailed in 1998 and early 1999 are expected to slow further, moderating their influence on measured price inflation.
There is also a risk that the recent sharp rise in crude oil prices, as well as the substantial increases in the prices of various construction materials, may put upward pressure on items in the core CPI for which these materials constitute a significant part of total costs.
The magnitude of these price-level effects would depend on the extent to which the cost changes persist, as well as on market conditions.
Wage increases will likely continue to edge up over the next year and a half, a view consistent with that of the firms recently surveyed by the Bank's regional representatives.
However, further productivity gains are expected to keep increases in overall unit labour costs in check.
The price of existing housing, based on the Royal LePage index, has picked up somewhat this year with the record pace of sales.
New home prices are up only slightly above their year-ago level.
However, in a historical context, these indicators do not suggest a significant increase in underlying inflation pressures.
The ratio of unfilled orders to shipments in the manufacturing sector (a measure for near-term core inflation) has eased after a marked pickup last year that was partly related to developments in the aircraft industry.
The narrow monetary aggregates have continued to grow at a pace consistent with solid economic growth and low inflation.
The downward trend in M1 growth since late 1997 partly reflects the declining influence of the special factors that contributed to high M1 growth in the past few years, particularly movements of funds from non-personal notice accounts (not included in M1) into current accounts (included in M1).
As a result, this year the growth rates of the broader measures of transactions money, M1+ and M1++, have been converging towards that of M1.
When substitution effects are taken into account, the recent growth rate of transactions money is consistent with a growth rate of economic activity of about 3 1/2 per cent in the second half of 1999.
The Bank's M1-based inflation model suggests that inflation should remain within the inflation-control target range over the next couple of years.
The year-over-year growth rate of M2++, which is the Bank's preferred measure of broad money, has stabilized in the last few months.
The decline in the growth rate from about 8 per cent in 1998 to 6 1/2 per cent currently reflects a deceleration in households' net contributions to bond and equity mutual funds.
The recent growth rate of M2++ continues to point to inflation close to the midpoint of the target range over the next year.
With longer-term inflation expectations at 2 per cent and the economy expected to be operating at, or slightly above, estimates of capacity output, fundamental factors will be working to keep core inflation near the 2 per cent midpoint of the target range.
Nonetheless, over the next year and a half, three developments are expected to contribute to moderating core inflation.
First, the pass-through to inflation of the earlier depreciation of the Canadian dollar has peaked, so this source of temporary upward pressure on core inflation should diminish.
Second, increases in unit labour costs are expected to be modest.
Third, intense competition in the retail sector will likely continue.
On the other hand, two factors are expected to limit any potential decrease in core inflation during this period: the earlier substantial declines in long-distance telephone rates and computer prices should continue to slow, and the recent marked recovery in commodity prices could be a temporary source of upward pressure on non-labour costs.
But with crude oil prices no longer under upward pressure, total CPI inflation will tend to move down to the core inflation rate.
In summary, the Bank expects core inflation to remain close to 2.0 per cent through next year.
This outlook, which is broadly in line with earlier expectations, is based on two important assumptions: that the US economy achieves a more sustainable, non-inflationary growth rate, and that the path the Canadian economy follows is close to capacity output.
The US economy has remained buoyant, signs of a recovery in Japan have emerged, the euro area appears to have a solid underpinning, and a number of emerging-market economies have outperformed expectations.
With this international setting and with strengthening domestic demand, the Canadian economy is likely to register growth of close to 3.75 per cent on an annual average basis in 1999.
For 2000, the Bank now projects economic growth in a range of 2.75 to 3.75 per cent, with core inflation remaining close to the midpoint of its 1 to 3 per cent target range.
However, as we have pointed out in this Report, there are some important risks to this projection.
These risks relate to the possibility of a stronger momentum of demand from domestic as well as international sources and of potential inflation pressures in the United States.
In order to preserve the low trend of inflation incorporated in this projection, the Bank must be ready to adjust monetary conditions in a timely manner.
Any resurgence of inflation in Canada would undermine our prospects for a durable expansion.
Information received since the last Monetary Policy Report, released on 17 November, points to a stronger pace of economic expansion in the United States and Europe than was expected at that time, and confirms the hesitant nature of the recovery in Japan.
With the further strengthening of global demand, world prices of non-agricultural commodities have continued to bounce back from the lows reached a year ago.
This has been particularly true for oil, lumber, and nickel, where production constraints have also been a factor.
Higher crude oil prices have led to higher energy prices for consumers, raising the headline rate of inflation in a number of Canada's trading partners.
As yet, however, these countries have not seen any significant increases in pressure on the underlying trend of inflation as measured by consumer prices excluding energy.
Nonetheless, in light of the stronger-than-expected pace of economic expansion, monetary authorities in the United States and Europe have raised policy interest rates in recent months to counter potential inflation pressures.
Renewed concerns that US short-term interest rates may have to rise further to stem inflation pressures have led to increases in US interest rate futures and in medium - and long-term bond yields.
In Canada, the growth rate of aggregate demand in the third quarter of 1999 was broadly in line with expectations.
Supported by rising exports and household demand, real GDP advanced at an annual rate of 4.7 per cent.
Based on available indicators, the Bank estimates that growth in the fourth quarter remained strong at about 4 per cent.
Employment has also been expanding rapidly, taking the unemployment rate to its lowest level in 18 years.
Recent hikes in energy prices have pushed the year-over-year rate of increase in the total CPI in Canada into the upper half of the 1 to 3 per cent target range for inflation control, but the rate of increase in the core CPI (CPI excluding food, energy, and the effect of changes in indirect taxes) has remained in the lower half of the range.
In November, it fell to 1.5 per cent, partly because of temporary discounts on items such as women's clothing.
Core inflation is expected to move back up near the midpoint of the target range over the next few months.
Overall, developments in the last three months underscore the risks to Canada's economic outlook highlighted in the last Report: stronger momentum of demand for Canadian output from both domestic and external sources and potential inflationary pressures in the United States.
On 17 November, after holding the Bank Rate steady at 4.75 per cent since early May, the Bank of Canada raised the Bank Rate by 25 basis points, to 5 per cent, following a similar increase in the US Federal Reserve's target for the federal funds rate.
The Bank's action, which was aimed at keeping future inflation comfortably inside the target range, took into consideration the implications for Canada of US economic and financial developments, as well as evidence of robust growth in domestic demand.
The performance of emerging-market economies has generally been better than expected, although some areas of concern remain.
The recovery in Asia has gained momentum, especially in those countries that have undertaken significant structural reforms.
The Mexican economy has surged in recent quarters, but growth remains weak in most other Latin American countries.
Faced with significant external debt-service burdens, many Latin American economies remain vulnerable to possible increases in global interest rates.
In the euro area, the pace of economic expansion accelerated more quickly in the second half of 1999 than had been anticipated, primarily reflecting stronger growth in France.
Although the strengthening trend has taken hold less rapidly in Germany and Italy, the pace of activity in the euro area should continue to pick up, supported by improving consumer and business confidence.
Market concerns about lagging growth in some regions and the lack of progress on structural reform have, however, contributed to downward pressure on the euro.
The euro hovered at just over parity with the US dollar in late December, before picking up somewhat in early January.
The U.K.  economy has also picked up more rapidly than expected.
The economies of both the euro area and the United Kingdom now appear poised to expand at an annual pace of 3 per cent or better over the near term.
The Japanese economy enjoyed unexpectedly strong growth of about 5 per cent (at annual rates) in the first half of 1999.
Nevertheless, the decline in output in the third quarter, when fiscal support diminished, highlights the continued dependence of the recovery on government stimulus.
A self-sustaining recovery based on private sector demand is, as yet, not apparent.
Moreover, the yen's sharp appreciation since the middle of 1999, the impact of higher energy prices, and the continuing need for structural adjustment in both the financial and industrial sectors lend additional uncertainty to the near-term outlook.
However, the new fiscal-stimulus package announced in November should help counter these factors and cause GDP to expand in 2000.
Owing largely to higher energy prices, consumer prices increased by about 1 1/2 per cent in the euro area and the United Kingdom in the year to November.
The European Central Bank raised policy interest rates by 50 basis points in November, noting that, in the context of the current strengthening climate, its move should help restrain inflation expectations.
The Bank of England raised its repo rate by 25 basis points in November and again in January to counter developing pressures in labour markets and on productive capacity.
In Japan, with the CPI declining by about 1 per cent in the year to November, the Bank of Japan maintained domestic short-term interest rates at very low levels.
In the United States, growth in real GDP has continued to outstrip most expectations, reaching 5.7 per cent (at an annual rate) in the third quarter of 1999.
Although housing expenditures weakened over this period (likely because of higher financing costs), consumer spending and business investment in machinery and equipment were buoyant.
Labour markets remain very tight, with the unemployment rate at 4.1 per cent in December, its lowest level since 1970.
Since the year-2000 changeover may temporarily be distorting consumer and business spending patterns, it is difficult to judge whether the US economy is slowing from its recent trend growth rate of about 4 per cent.
Several factors are, nevertheless, expected to moderate the expansion of demand over the course of this year.
In particular, the low personal savings rate and a less rapid increase in household wealth are expected to slow the growth of household spending.
Higher interest rates (including medium - and long-term rates) should also eventually make themselves felt across the economy.
And the increase in energy prices, if sustained, may have a restraining effect on growth.
Boosted by a 13 per cent increase in energy prices, the total CPI in the United States rose by 2.7 per cent (on a year-over-year basis) in December 1999, compared with 1.6 per cent a year earlier.
In contrast, core inflation has been contained at 1.9 per cent, down from a year ago.
Despite this favourable price performance, the overall high level of resource utilization and the rapid pace of growth in the US economy continue to pose a potential inflation risk.
Some factors that had helped to restrain inflation in the past have also turned around - the recovery in economic growth outside North America has begun to take up slack globally; commodity prices, particularly energy prices, are on an upward path; and the US dollar has stopped appreciating on a trade-weighted basis.
In view of the potential inflationary risks, US monetary authorities raised policy rates by 25 basis points in mid-November, the third increase in 1999, thereby reversing all of the 75-basis-point reduction that was implemented in response to financial turbulence in the autumn of 1998.
The extent of additional interest rate increases would appear to depend on the prospects for continued strong productivity growth.
Recently revised data show significantly stronger US output growth in the latter half of the 1990s than was originally reported, with correspondingly stronger growth in labour productivity.
Data for the third quarter of 1999 indicate that labour productivity in the non-farm private sector rose by slightly more than 3 per cent over the past year.
These strong productivity gains have helped to offset the impact of wage increases on production costs, thereby containing price pressures.
Productivity growth at this rate may not be sustainable, however.
The spread between US conventional and inflation-protected (real return) bonds suggests that longer-term inflation expectations, after having been relatively stable during most of the second half of 1999, increased early in the new year.
In response to changing market perceptions of the inflation risks, long-term interest rates have exhibited some volatility around a rising trend.
As well, most market participants are anticipating one or more additional quarter-point increases in US policy rates in the first part of 2000.
Another source of uncertainty for the US economy is that country's large current account deficit, which now stands at about 4 per cent of GDP.
While this could be expected to eventually lead to a lower US dollar, the timing and extent of such exchange rate movements are difficult to predict.
The average US dollar price of Canada's key primary commodities, as measured by the Bank of Canada's commodity price index, has risen by about 6 per cent since the end of October 1999.
Although much of the increase reflects the rise in the world price of crude oil, there has also been a significant recovery in the prices of other non-agricultural commodities.
Prices for agricultural commodities remain low, however, owing largely to the effect on grain prices of higher estimates of global wheat production as well as higher stocks.
While the recent movements continue the turnaround in commodity prices, the index for non-energy commodities is still about 7 per cent below the level reached prior to the declines sustained in the wake of the Asian crisis.
Crude oil prices have posted strong increases because of continued output restrictions by OPEC and several non-OPEC producers as well as rising demand in the United States and elsewhere.
Prices were buoyed by statements from OPEC officials indicating that many members favour maintaining output restrictions beyond the March 2000 expiry date.
Natural gas prices have risen to a lesser extent, under the moderating influence of milder-than-normal temperatures in much of North America.
While higher prices for non-agricultural commodities reflect an increase in world demand, pressures have been especially pronounced for commodities subjected to production constraints.
For instance, much of the recent increase in the prices of base metals stems from a sharp rise in the price of nickel that reflected concerns about reduced supply resulting from a lockout at a major Canadian mine.
Significant increases in world production of stainless steel, a major user of nickel, have also contributed to the rebound in nickel prices.
Similarly, the rise in lumber prices, while supported by the strong North American housing market, has occurred largely in response to announcements of extended winter shutdowns by several British Columbia producers who had used up their US export quotas.
Economic information released since early November has been broadly consistent with the views expressed in the November Monetary Policy Report.
There appears, however, to be more momentum in the Canadian economic expansion arising from greater-than-anticipated strength in both the US economy and world commodity markets.
Real GDP in Canada rose by 4.7 per cent (at an annual rate) in the third quarter of 1999, broadly in line with expectations.
The composition of demand was also largely as expected.
Canadian exports surged, chiefly because of the strength of the US economy.
Consumer spending continued to rise substantially, reflecting the relatively high level of consumer confidence, lower personal income tax rates, and possibly, to a small extent, the increase in perceived personal financial wealth associated with the recent demutualization of Canadian life insurance companies.
At the same time, business investment, residential construction, and imports all moderated from their vigorous pace of expansion in the first half of the year.
Government spending on goods and services increased by less than had been anticipated, and it appears that the rise in provincial health-care spending, related to measures in the 1999 federal budget, will take place more gradually than expected.
Early indicators for the fourth quarter point to continued robust economic growth.
Available information on US economic developments and merchandise trade data for October suggest that the growth of Canadian exports should remain healthy.
Strong employment gains in Canada in the fourth quarter, especially for full-time, non-self-employed jobs, raise the prospect of substantial growth in personal income and continued expansion of household spending.
These recent developments reinforce the Bank's view, expressed in the last Report, that real GDP growth in Canada will be close to 3.75 per cent (on an annual average basis) in 1999.
The momentum of stronger external demand has, however, shifted the likely outcome for economic growth in 2000 towards the upper half of the 2.75 to 3.75 per cent range projected in November.
The 12-month rate of increase in the core CPI fell to 1.5 per cent in November, slightly below expectations.
The main surprise was sharply lower prices for semi-durable items, particularly women's clothing, which has been a volatile component of consumer prices in recent months.
Two other statistical measures of the trend rate of inflation, the CPIX and CPIW, continue to be close to core inflation.
Over the coming months, three factors will be working to move core inflation back towards the 2 per cent midpoint of the Bank's target range: a reversal of recent discounts, longer-term inflation expectations that remain close to 2 per cent, and the possibility that the economy will be operating at, or slightly above, potential output.
Two factors, however, should be acting to moderate core inflation.
First, recent price developments suggest that we have already seen the peak effect on inflation of the pass-through to consumer prices from the depreciation of the Canadian dollar in 1998.
Second, unit labour costs in the third quarter barely edged up from their level of a year earlier, since the upward movement in wage increases was largely offset by stronger productivity gains.
The Bank expects core inflation to increase to 2 per cent (on a year-over-year basis) in the first quarter of this year, partly reflecting a reversal of temporary factors that lowered core inflation late last year.
The balance of other factors at work also points to a pickup in core inflation from its recent low level.
Moreover, as highlighted earlier in this update, the developments of the past three months underscore the inflation risks for Canada that were discussed in last November's Report.
While sharply higher world energy prices have had some effect on core inflation (for example, through the impact of higher fuel costs on air fares), the marked rise in commodity prices generally has not yet been a significant source of upward pressure on the core CPI.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI has, however, been well above that of the core CPI in recent months, owing to the sharp rebound in the prices of gasoline, fuel oil, and natural gas.
Further upward movement in crude oil prices since early November is expected to push the rate of increase in the total CPI close to 3 per cent in coming months.
Subsequently, this rate is still expected to move down towards the core rate of inflation, although more slowly than projected in the November Report.
The Conference Board, in the winter issue of its quarterly Survey of Forecasters, notes that the average private sector forecast for the CPI is 2.2 per cent in 2000 and 2.0 per cent in 2001.
The marked rise in the prices of Canada's commodity exports was a major factor in the increase in the chain price index for GDP in the third quarter, which rose by 2.1 per cent on a year-over-year basis.
Most information released since early November supports the view that prospective increases in unit labour costs will be modest.
The year-over-year increase in the average hourly wage (excluding over-time) for permanent workers, according to Statistics Canada's Labour Force Information, was 2.8 per cent in the fourth quarter of 1999, up slightly from the third quarter.
Recent compensation surveys suggest that pay increases for 2000 will be at, or slightly below, those received in 1999.
The average annual increase in wage settlements in the unionized private sector jumped to 4.0 per cent in September-October 1999 because of high-profile settlements in the automobile manufacturing industry.
Excluding these settlements, private and public settlements averaged 2.1 per cent over those two months.
Economy-wide, unit labour costs also remain broadly unchanged on a year-over-year basis.
However, with the unemployment rate falling to an 18-year low of just under 7 per cent in November and December, there have been some reports of labour shortages.
The participation rate has shown little change in the past year but may rise somewhat over the near term in response to the recent favourable labour market developments.
The Bank continues to closely monitor a wide range of indicators of pressures on capacity and inflation.
Based on the Bank's conventional measure, it appears that the Canadian economy will be operating above estimated potential output in 2000.
There is, however, a wide confidence band around such estimates, particularly given the major structural changes that have taken place in Canadian product and labour markets in the 1990s.
Nevertheless, the measured rate of capacity utilization in the non-farm goods-producing sector in the third quarter was at its highest level since 1987-88, another indication that the Canadian economy may be approaching full capacity.
At the same time, despite a robust economy, core inflation has been broadly in line with expectations.
And while the year-over-year rise in prices for existing homes continued to be relatively buoyant in the third quarter, prices for new homes were up only moderately from year-earlier levels.
As well, the ratio of unfilled orders to shipments in the manufacturing sector has shown little change in recent months, and our monetary aggregates (see next section) point to core inflation remaining close to the midpoint of the target range.
M1 growth has picked up somewhat since the last Report, with the year-over-year growth rate increasing to about 8 per cent on average in the October-November period.
Part of this uptick (especially in November) may reflect a buildup of liquidity related to the transition to the year 2000.
While the broader aggregates M1+ and M1++ did not grow as rapidly as M1 over this period, their year-over-year growth rates have also increased somewhat, extending a trend that started at the beginning of 1999.
At around 6 to 7 per cent, this expansion is consistent with a continuing solid pace of economic activity but does not signal a buildup of inflation pressures.
The Bank's M1-based model continues to suggest that inflation will remain within the inflation-control target range over the next couple of years.
On a year-over-year basis, the recent growth rate of the broad monetary aggregate M2++ has remained in the range of 6 to 7 per cent that characterized its behaviour for virtually all of 1999.
This growth rate is consistent with inflation close to the midpoint of the target range.
Household credit has grown at a solid pace in recent months, indicating continued strong consumer spending in the near term.
Growth in business credit has remained relatively modest as higher profits have limited the demand for external financing.
Altogether, the information coming from financial variables is consistent with output growth in the 2.75 to 3.75 per cent range in 2000.
Simple indicator models, based solely on the growth rate of the narrow monetary aggregates, suggest that growth will be within that range.
Models that also include the spread between long-term and short-term interest rates predict growth slightly above the upper end of the range.
The solid growth in household credit and in long-term business credit is also consistent with the projected growth in economic activity.
With household credit rising somewhat faster than disposable income, the ratio of outstanding personal debt to disposable income edged up in the third quarter.
Nonetheless, the estimated ratio of debt interest payments to disposable income is well below its average for the past 20 years.
Soon after the completion of the November 1999 Report, evidence of robust domestic economic growth and continued strong external demand emanating from the United States prompted the Bank to raise the Bank Rate by 25 basis points to 5 per cent.
This followed the US Federal Reserve's move to increase its target for the federal funds rate by the same amount.
The Bank had held the Bank Rate unchanged through two previous increases in the federal funds rate.
The Bank's action in November was taken with a view to keeping inflation well within its inflation-control target range of 1 to 3 per cent.
The decision to raise rates was anticipated by the markets, and thus did not significantly alter market interest rates.
Long-term bond rates around the world began to drift higher in November on concerns that inflationary pressures may emerge as demand pushes against capacity constraints.
Canadian bond yields have not risen as much as those in the United States, however, and spreads on nominal bond yields are once again negative.
The yield differential between conventional and Real Return bonds, which tends to reflect financial market expectations of future inflation, has remained relatively unchanged at about 2 per cent since the last Report, after increasing through the course of 1999.
North American 90-day commercial paper rates, particularly in the United States, showed considerable volatility as maturity dates crossed over into the year 2000, and again towards the end of 1999.
To help minimize potential year-2000 effects, both the Federal Reserve and the Bank of Canada put in place contingency liquidity arrangements.
By mid-January, short-term rates in North America better reflected actual overnight rates and had built in expectations of possible future central bank rate moves.
Financial market participants also took precautionary measures throughout 1999 to avoid the need for transactions over the year-end period.
For example, corporations switched to longer-term financing and transactions were timed not to mature near the end of the year.
Such activity led to diminished liquidity in fixed-income and foreign-exchange markets towards the end of December, but not as much as had been expected.
The Canada/US exchange rate fluctuated in a range of 67.50 to 68.50 US cents from mid-November to mid-December.
During that period, perceptions of seasonal weakness in the Canadian dollar may have weighed on the currency.
Since then, the dollar strengthened to 69 US cents, reflecting continued strength in commodity markets, a current account surplus in the third quarter of 1999, and the strong fundamentals of the Canadian economy.
The Bank's monetary conditions index has fluctuated between -6.5 and -5.5 since mid-November.
The global economy has shown greater strength than was anticipated at the time of the November Report.
Japan, however, has not yet shared in this stepped-up activity.
This strengthening pace of global economic expansion carries with it an increasing risk of potential inflation pressures.
This is especially true for the United States, where there is mounting evidence that demand is pressing against supply, particularly in the labour market.
In addition, because of the marked rise in world oil prices during the winter, the headline rate of consumer inflation increased sharply in most countries.
Canada's economic performance over the past six months has also exceeded expectations.
Growth has been stronger than projected, reflecting both the buoyancy of external demand and more vigorous domestic demand.
The trend of inflation has been lower than expected, however, and has remained among the lowest in the major industrial countries.
This low level of inflation is one of the main reasons why Canadian interest rates have stayed below comparable US rates.
These developments raise several key areas of uncertainty for the conduct of Canadian monetary policy in the period ahead.
First, the momentum of demand in Canada from both international and domestic sources could continue to outpace expectations.
Second, a possible buildup of inflationary pressures in the United States could have implications for Canada.
Third, the capacity of the Canadian economy to produce goods and services without adding to inflationary pressures may be higher than previously thought.
Since last autumn, core inflation (CPI excluding food, energy, and the effect of changes in indirect taxes) has moved down within the lower part of the Bank's inflation-control target range.
At the time of the November 1999 Report, core inflation was expected to increase to the mid-point of the 1 to 3 per cent target range in the first quarter of 2000.
The substantial jump in energy prices moved the rate of increase in the total CPI sharply higher to the upper end of the target range.
Inflation and the target range The 12-month rate of increase in the core CPI was 1.5 per cent in March, compared with 1.9 per cent last September.
Other statistical measures of the trend rate of inflation are around the level of core inflation.
This recent decline in core inflation can be explained largely by developments in several components of household spending.
Over the past year, prices for most imported non-energy consumer goods and services declined as a result of the appreciation of the Canadian dollar and lower US dollar prices for these items.
Competitive pressures in the retail sector have also been intense, leading to discounts on semi-durable consumer goods such as clothing and footwear, and, to a lesser extent, on durables such as automobiles and household appliances.
In addition, the possibility of less pressure on capacity output than was previously expected appears to have played a role.
Despite the decline in core inflation, the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI rose from 2.6 per cent in September to 3 per cent in March.
This divergence reflects the impact of the dramatic rise in energy prices on the total CPI.
The hike in energy prices was caused primarily by the sharp run-up in crude oil prices over the past year that resulted from supply constraints by OPEC and several non-OPEC producers, and from rising global demand.
Natural gas prices also rose, but less than oil prices.
More recently, world prices for crude oil have fallen back somewhat from their first-quarter peak.
Prices for many other non-agricultural commodities - notably base metals and pulp - have also moved up substantially, largely because of strengthening global demand.
These increases, combined with higher oil prices, have caused the average US dollar price of the major primary commodities produced in Canada (as measured by the Bank of Canada's commodity price index) to rise by 32 per cent since the end of 1998.
This substantial recovery in the prices of Canada's commodity exports also accounts for the marked rise in 1999 of the chain price index for GDP (a broad price measure of the goods and services produced in Canada), relative to the core CPI.
The pace of Canada's economic expansion continued to strengthen in the second half of 1999 and into early 2000, reflecting the extremely robust economic growth in the United States, further recovery in world commodity prices, and growing momentum in domestic demand.
Real GDP in Canada rose at an annual rate of 5.0 per cent in the second half of 1999, after a gain of 4.3 per cent in the first half.
For the first quarter of 2000, current information points to continued strong growth in a range of 4 to 5 per cent.
The vigorous expansion of US aggregate demand and the highly competitive position of Canadian industry have contributed to increased growth in export volumes, especially exports of finished goods such as machinery and equipment and automotive products.
In addition, the recovery in commodity prices led to a resumption of growth in the volume of commodity exports.
The growth of household spending eased slightly in the second half of the year but, nevertheless, remained strong, reflecting increased consumer confidence and continued strong gains in real income.
Indicators received to date also suggest that this momentum in household spending has carried forward into the first quarter of 2000.
The substantial growth of real personal disposable income has largely reflected solid gains in employment, particularly for full-time positions.
As a result, the unemployment rate has declined still further.
Lower personal income tax rates and, to a smaller degree, the increase in personal wealth associated with the recent demutualization of Canadian life insurance companies, have also supported consumer confidence and household expenditures.
With Canadian firms feeling confident about the economy and about their own financial prospects, investment in capital goods continued to grow substantially in the second half of 1999.
Expenditures on machinery and equipment, as well as on structures, remained high.
In particular, spending by the oil and gas sector rebounded considerably in the second half of 1999, following the sharp gains in crude oil and natural gas prices.
Early indicators point to continued strong investment growth in the first quarter of 2000.
Canada's current account position (in dollar terms) continued to improve during the second half of 1999 and was virtually in balance in the third quarter before it fell back into a small deficit at the end of the year.
This price advantage partly offset a reduction in the merchandise trade surplus in volume terms as imports continued to grow more briskly than exports.
Early information suggests that the current account position is likely to have moved back into surplus in the first quarter, following both a rebound in the real trade balance and a further increase in the terms of trade.
The Bank monitors a number of wage measures, each with its own limitations.
Overall, these measures suggest that wage growth has accelerated somewhat but has remained at, or slightly below, what would be consistent with Canada's average rate of productivity gains and the recent performance of trend inflation.
The year-over-year increase in the first quarter of 2000 was 3.2 per cent, up from 3.0 per cent in the previous quarter.
In contrast, another broad-based measure, the year-over-year increase in labour income per person-hour, was relatively stable in 1999 - within a range of 1 to 2 per cent.
According to wage-settlement data, which cover only about 20 per cent of non-agricultural paid employment, the average annual wage increase in the unionized private sector has been edging up since 1998, rising to 2.7 per cent in the last half of 1999 from 2.3 per cent in the first half, with most of that increase coming from settlements in the automobile industry.
Thus far in 2000, private sector settlements have averaged 2.8 per cent (for January and February).
Finally, a compensation survey by the Conference Board of Canada conducted in August and September 1999 suggested that pay increases in 2000 would be somewhat lower than in 1999.
Increases for the non-unionized private sector were projected to be 3.4 per cent compared with 3.6 per cent in 1999.
These projections may be revised upwards, however, because of the unexpected strength in the economy since the survey was completed.
Output per person-hour recovered in 1999 from a very weak performance the previous year, rising by over 1 per cent from the fourth quarter of 1998 to the fourth quarter of 1999.
Combined with moderate increases in labour income per person-hour, this improvement in labour productivity resulted in a modest increase in unit labour costs of about 1 per cent in 1999 - below the rate of core inflation.
Spending by business in 1999 on machinery and equipment, especially computers, remained very strong, which bodes well for future productivity growth.
Based on the Bank's conventional measurement techniques, the Canadian economy was operating about one-half of one per cent below capacity in mid-1999.
By year-end, these same techniques indicated that the economy was functioning close to three-quarters of one per cent above its production capacity.
There is always considerable uncertainty associated with the measurement of potential output, as can be seen by the wide confidence band around the estimated gap.
Because of this uncertainty, and because the economy is operating at such high levels, the Bank has stressed the need to look at a range of indicators to assess the degree of pressure on productive capacity.
A number of these other indicators suggest that the Bank's conventional measure of potential output has been underestimating the economy's ability to produce goods and services without adding to inflationary pressures.
Most importantly, even with the unexpectedly rapid growth of the economy, core inflation in recent months has been lower than had been anticipated, and this cannot be fully explained by temporary special factors.
In addition, despite the strong demand for exports, Statistics Canada's data on unfilled orders do not point to any significant bottlenecks in production.
In labour markets, while there is some evidence that the rate of wage growth has accelerated, overall wage gains have thus far been modest relative to productivity growth and inflation, and participation rates have been rising.
This suggests that labour markets are not as tight as would be indicated by the conventional measure of capacity output.
At the same time, several other indicators point to the rapid absorption of production capacity.
Statistics Canada's measured rate of capacity utilization in the non-farm, goods-producing sector increased in the second half of 1999, reaching the peak level achieved during the latter part of the 1980s.
In addition, the unemployment rate fell to a 24-year low of just under 7 per cent in early 2000, and reports of labour shortages have moved beyond the information technology sector to other occupations, including truck drivers and workers in the skilled manufacturing and construction trades.
On balance, the full range of indicators suggests that the Bank's conventional measure of capacity output has underestimated the amount of capacity in the Canadian economy.
Therefore, the Bank's overall judgment is that, as of the end of 1999, the economy had not yet moved into excess demand, but that it was rapidly absorbing capacity.
The Bank of Canada raised the Bank Rate by 25 basis points on both 3 February and 22 March, increasing the Bank Rate to 5.5 per cent and the target for the overnight interest rate to 5.25 per cent.
This action was taken to keep the future trend of inflation inside the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range, so that the Canadian economy could continue to expand in a sustainable way.
The Bank's actions took into account the implications for Canada of increases in the US Federal Reserve's policy rates and of the strong demand pressures in the United States spilling over into Canada.
In its policy announcement, the Federal Reserve underlined the risks of heightened inflation pressures in the United States in the foreseeable future as a result of unsustainably strong demand.
Although cyclical conditions in Canada bear important similarities to those in the United States, there are some significant differences, and the Bank of Canada's target for the overnight rate remains 75 basis points below the US target rate for federal funds.
Interest rate increases in both countries had been widely expected in financial markets.
Indeed, it was thought that in the United States, monetary conditions would have been tightened somewhat earlier had it not been for the temporary provision of liquidity in anticipation of the year-2000 date change.
In fact, short-term market interest rates in Canada and the United States, having already risen in anticipation of the policy actions, were virtually unaffected by the rate announcements themselves.
The yield curve has flattened considerably over the past six months, as medium - and, especially, long-term interest rates have fallen.
Decreases in government borrowing requirements have been an important reason for the decline in bond yields.
Government bond markets in both Canada and the United States have been affected by actual and anticipated reductions in long-term government debt.
This has resulted in thin markets, especially for the 30-year maturities, with occasional unusual price movements.
The Government of Canada yield curve has developed a hump, with yields on maturities at 3 to 10 years above the 30-year yield.
In the United States, the Treasury yield curve has inverted since November, and now has a negative slope.
In contrast, the yield curve for Canadian corporate bonds, which has been less affected by unusual supply factors, and which is indicative of the cost of borrowing in the private sector, has a normal positive slope.
Even so, the overall strength of the fixed-income markets is underpinned by a high degree of confidence in long-term price stability.
This is reflected in the relative firmness of the trade-weighted value of the Canadian dollar since November.
This firmness stems from the recovery in natural resource markets, an improvement in the current account of the balance of payments, and growing expectations of a sustained period of strong economic expansion.
While the Canadian dollar has not strengthened vis--vis the buoyant US dollar, it has risen sharply against overseas currencies.
Reflecting the rise in short-term market rates, the Bank's monetary conditions index increased from a range of -7.0 to -6.0 in the second half of 1999 to -5.5 to -5.0 recently.
In our analysis, the balance of forces continues to point to upward pressure on the core rate of inflation.
However, several key uncertainties continue to surround this projection.
The global economy has gained further momentum, with current growth rates in many parts of the world exceeding earlier expectations.
merging-market economies have contributed significantly to this stronger-than-expected growth, and prospects for this group are generally bright in 2000.
The Asian economies that were at the centre of the 1997-98 financial crisis continue to solidify their recovery.
Although growth in the Latin American economies other than Mexico was weak in 1999, it is expected to improve substantially this year.
Economic growth in both the euro area and the United Kingdom accelerated in the second half of 1999 to about 3.5 per cent.
Although a slightly slower pace of expansion is expected through 2000, activity should remain solid.
Headline inflation has risen in both areas, although higher energy prices (together with rising mortgage costs in the United Kingdom) appear to account for much of the recent increase.
The European Central Bank and the Bank of England have raised policy interest rates to counter the inflation risks from stronger demand and, in the case of the ECB, the decline in the external value of the euro.
The outlook remains far more uncertain for Japan, where weak final domestic demand led to a second consecutive quarterly decline in real GDP in the fourth quarter of 1999.
More recent indicators suggest that, despite the yen's continued strength against other currencies, growth can be expected to improve in the first half of 2000, supported by the fiscal-stimulus package announced by the government last November.
It is not yet clear, however, when a self-sustaining recovery based on private sector demand will take hold.
In the United States, growth in real GDP has continued to outstrip expectations, rising at an annual rate of over 7 per cent in the final quarter of 1999 and averaging 4.6 per cent through the year.
This strong momentum has carried into the first part of 2000.
(Preliminary data indicate first-quarter growth of 5.4 per cent.)
Nevertheless, some slowing in the pace of expansion is expected over the course of this year and in 2001, as the growth of consumer expenditures weakens in response to low personal savings rates and to recent and prospective increases in interest rates.
Volatility in the equity market may also dampen consumer optimism.
US core inflation (which excludes food and energy prices) has moved above 2 per cent.
Strong productivity gains, however, have helped to contain overall cost and price pressures.
Despite this generally favourable performance, the high level of resource utilization and the rapid pace of aggregate demand growth in excess of the growth of potential output continue to pose a potential inflation risk.
Consequently, US monetary authorities have gradually raised official interest rates.
While the expansion of the US economy is expected to slow from the current unsustainable rates, it is uncertain how quickly this will occur.
What seems clear, however, is the need for the pace of US economic expansion to slow to rates close to, or below, growth in potential output.
Another imbalance in the US economy, reflecting the unsustainably high levels and growth of demand relative to supply, is the large current account deficit.
Some narrowing of the current account deficit can be expected as the US economy slows and overseas economies continue to recover, but a significant reduction is unlikely without a depreciation of the US dollar over the medium term.
Crude oil prices rose sharply through the first quarter of 2000.
They then fell back following announced production increases by OPEC in April.
Oil prices are expected to stabilize, or even drop slightly further, during the course of this year.
In contrast, prices for non-energy commodities should continue to firm as a result of the vigorous growth in global demand.
While US economic growth is projected to slow this year from its recent torrid pace, it is still expected to remain relatively robust at around 4 per cent (fourth quarter over fourth quarter).
This, together with the considerable strengthening of commodity prices and strong domestic demand, augurs well for vigorous economic growth in Canada this year.
With economic activity in the United States at levels already high relative to capacity, the Bank expects the US economy to slow further in 2001 to below potential growth (currently estimated by Bank staff to be about 3.25 per cent) in order to address the imbalances highlighted above.
This projected profile for US growth contributes importantly to a slowing of the Canadian economy in 2001.
Stronger activity in many of Canada's other trading partners and higher commodity prices should offset this effect somewhat.
Import growth is also expected to moderate this year, as domestic demand for import-intensive goods slows.
Further gains in employment, federal pay-equity settlements, and reductions in personal income taxes are expected to support a high level of consumer confidence and strong growth in household spending.
Recent equity market volatility, however, may add an element of caution to consumer spending plans.
After a strong advance in 1999 that was partly driven by concerns about year-2000 readiness, business investment is expected to remain at high levels this year, given expectations of solid growth in external and domestic demand and substantial cash flows from commodity production.
Moreover, investment could continue to advance rapidly since resources that were devoted to dealing with year-2000 concerns can now be redirected towards adding to capacity.
The February 2000 federal budgetary expenditures are slightly more expansionary than the fiscal outlook presented in the November 1999 Economic and Fiscal Update.
The additional spending is expected to be spread out over 2000 and 2001.
The latest consensus among private sector forecasters for real GDP growth (on an average annual basis) has been revised upwards considerably - to 4.1 per cent for 2000, from 2.9 per cent at the time of the November Report.
For 2001, the latest consensus forecast calls for real GDP growth of 3.1 per cent.
Taking into account the upward revision to growth in 1999 as well as recent data, the Bank projects output growth in Canada in 2000 of about 4 to 4.5 per cent.
This projection, together with a growth in potential output, based on the Bank's conventional estimate, in a range of 2.5 to 3.0 per cent, implies the likely emergence of excess demand pressures in the Canadian economy in 2000.
Thus, to avoid a buildup of inflationary pressures, economic growth will need to slow to a rate close to that of potential output in 2001.
Such an outcome would entail a combination of a slowdown in the US economy and some moderation in domestic spending growth in Canada.
In projecting demand pressures in 2001, the Bank must consider not only the issue of the current level of potential output, but also the uncertainty regarding the growth rate of capacity output going forward.
The increased intensity of private and public sector restructuring in the 1990s, the recent high levels of investment in machinery and equipment, and the potential for the marked acceleration in US labour productivity to spill over into Canada, all suggest a possible rise in the future rate of productivity growth in Canada.
However, the size and timing of any such increase is even more uncertain than estimates of the current level of capacity.
The Bank will therefore be carefully monitoring all possible indicators of capacity and the degree of pressure on capacity to see whether there is evidence of a higher growth of potential output.
But until such evidence is available, the Bank will be taking a prudent approach to projecting potential output.
In the regular survey reported in the Conference Board's spring Index of Business Confidence, 53 per cent of respondents reported that they expect prices, in general, will increase over the next six months at a rate of 2 per cent or less, and 92 per cent expected a rate of 3 per cent or less.
The proportion of respondents expecting 2 per cent or less is down considerably from last autumn, likely reflecting the recent impact of higher world oil prices on the total CPI.
As well, some 92 per cent of the firms surveyed in March by the Bank of Canada's regional representatives expect CPI inflation to remain in the 1 to 3 per cent range this year.
The average private sector forecast for the rate of increase in the total CPI is 2.3 per cent in 2000 (up from 2.0 per cent last autumn) and 2.1 per cent for 2001.
These upward revisions largely reflect higher energy prices.
Over the past half-year, the yield differential between conventional bonds and Real Return Bonds has tended to vary with the fluctuations in nominal yields but has remained near 2 per cent (with the yield on Real Return Bonds being relatively stable).
For various reasons, it cannot be inferred that long-term inflation expectations are exactly at this level, but, nevertheless, it is reassuring that the differential has stabilized near the centre of the inflation-control target range.
The first-quarter run-up in crude oil prices (which was partially reversed in April) is not expected to significantly affect the core CPI.
To date, only air fares have reacted to the rise in energy prices, but we may still see some evidence of pass-through in other components of core inflation.
The size of these first-round effects will depend on how long high oil prices persist as well as on overall market conditions in the economy.
Wage increases will likely stabilize at around 3 per cent this year, consistent with the expectations reported by a number of national compensation surveys.
With the strong investment in machinery and equipment experienced through 1999 and increasingly tight labour markets, productivity growth is expected to rise in 2000.
As a result, unit labour costs should continue to rise only modestly (excluding the one-time effect of the federal pay-equity settlements on labour income).
The appreciation of the Canadian dollar since the beginning of 1999 should help to restrain inflation during 2000.
With record sales, the year-over-year rise in prices for existing housing (based on the Royal LePage index) gained momentum during 1999, reaching 6.1 per cent in the fourth quarter.
The year-over-year increase in new home prices, while still moderate at 2.1 per cent in February, has also picked up significantly since last autumn as a result of higher costs for construction materials.
These indicators, as well as the declining apartment vacancy rate, suggest that some tightness is emerging in the housing market.
The growth of the narrow monetary aggregates has accelerated since November.
This robust expansion would indicate a buoyant trend in total spending, since these aggregates have been good indicators of real GDP.
Their recent growth would suggest increases in real GDP at a 4 to 5 per cent rate in the first half of 2000.
This estimate is based on the view that part of the recent increase in investment dealer accounts, which has boosted narrow money growth, will not translate into stronger real GDP growth.
Although narrow money is not expected to continue growing at its recent rapid pace, the current surge in money growth raises the possibility that core inflation might move into the upper half of the Bank's target range next year.
Despite some acceleration in the second half of 1999, this aggregate has remained on a fairly steady growth path over the past several years, one that is historically in line with inflation remaining in the 1 to 3 per cent range.
For example, during the 1990s, broad money often grew at similar, or even higher, rates with no inflationary consequences.
Household and business credit exhibit contrasting patterns.
The growth of household credit has expanded steadily at a rate of 6 to 7 per cent for some years.
On the other hand, growth in business borrowing declined in 1998 and 1999 - from a double-digit rate to about 5 per cent.
Although investment outlays are strong, businesses have ample funding from retained earnings and, hence, there is no strong demand for external financing.
The behaviour of money and credit aggregates thus suggests an ample supply of liquidity which, for the time being, may still be appropriate, but which must be carefully assessed in the period ahead.
Overall, two fundamental factors are expected to put upward pressure on core inflation over the next 18 months.
First, longer-term inflation expectations are close to 2 per cent - about 0.5 per cent above the current level of core inflation.
Second, with output growth projected to be about 4 to 4.5 per cent in 2000, capacity pressures in product and labour markets are expected to emerge.
Mitigating these upward pressures on the core CPI will be the pass-through effects from the recent appreciation of the Canadian dollar to lower import prices and the modest expected increases in unit labour costs.
On balance, with some demand pressures emerging this year, the Bank sees core inflation rising gradually towards the mid-point of the inflation-control range.
As noted previously, for the core rate of inflation to remain close to the midpoint in 2001, some deceleration in the growth of overall aggregate demand in Canada relative to production potential will be required.
The rate of increase in the total CPI is expected to move down towards core inflation, but how quickly this happens will depend importantly on movements in crude oil prices.
If crude oil prices remain near $US25, the increase in the CPI should start to move towards the core rate during the second quarter of this year.
Aggregate demand, output, and employment grew more rapidly than expected, while core inflation remained low, below projected levels.
This combination of developments has led the Bank to conclude that at the end of 1999 the productive capacity of the Canadian economy was higher than conventional estimation techniques had been suggesting and that the economy was not yet in excess demand.
At the same time, however, the robust pace of expansion through the second half of 1999 and into 2000 was rapidly absorbing productive capacity, and some early signs of pressures on capacity limits had begun to emerge.
Given this strong momentum of demand, the Bank has raised its projection of economic growth this year to a range of 4 to 4.5 per cent.
This, in turn, is expected to raise the core rate of inflation to close to the midpoint of the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control target range.
For the core inflation rate to remain steady near 2 per cent during 2001, some deceleration in the overall pace of economic expansion in Canada or a more rapid expansion of productivity and of production capacity would be required.
The main risks to this outcome are the possibility of stronger-than-expected momentum of aggregate demand from both US and domestic sources as well as the possibility of a potential increase in inflation pressures in the United States.
While capacity output in Canada may be higher than expected over this projection period, the Bank is inclined to take a cautious approach to projecting a permanently higher rate of potential growth.
The challenge for monetary policy will be to carefully assess the balance between aggregate demand and supply in these circumstances of strong growth and high levels of activity, and to adjust monetary conditions in a timely manner in order to preserve the low trend of inflation that has been benefiting the Canadian economy.
Information received since the last Monetary Policy Report continues to show solid economic growth in the United States, Europe, and the emerging markets.
The Japanese economy has also shown signs of improvement.
As the global economy continues to expand and oil producers maintain production quotas, the world price of crude oil and the North American price of natural gas have been higher than expected.
In contrast, prices for most non-energy commodities have been below expectations.
In the United States, core inflation, which excludes energy and food prices, has continued to edge up.
Recent data indicate that the pace of US activity remains robust.
However, there have been signs of slowing in interest-rate-sensitive sectors.
Whether the slowing will be sufficient to reduce inflation pressures is not yet clear.
Given the tight labour market, the balance of risks suggests continued upward pressure on US core inflation.
In Canada, the growth of aggregate demand in the first quarter was at the top end of the Bank's expectations.
Propelled by strong exports to the United States and by buoyant business investment, real GDP rose at an annual rate of 4.9 per cent.
Based on available indicators, the Bank estimates that growth in the second quarter remained strong at between 3.50 and 4.25 per cent.
Together with upward revisions to the level of economic activity in the second half of 1999, these figures have led the Bank to revise its projection of GDP growth for 2000 to between 4.25 and 4.75 per cent (on an annual average basis), up 0.25 percentage points from the projection in the May Report.
For the remainder of this year, the Bank continues to project a pace of activity below that of the first half, but still somewhat above potential output growth.
Despite the stronger momentum in the first half, the rate of increase in Canada's core CPI (which excludes the volatile food and energy components, and the effects of changes in indirect taxes) remained unexpectedly low in the second quarter of this year.
This suggests that demand may not yet have outstripped Canada's production capacity.
However, excess capacity is being absorbed rapidly and pressures on capacity are expected to emerge as we progress through the year.
Hence, core inflation is still projected to move close to the midpoint of the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent target range by early 2001.
Because of higher energy prices, the increase in total CPI is now expected to remain above core inflation until some time in the first part of next year.
In terms of the risks to this outlook, developments since the last Report reinforce the uncertainties that the Bank has been highlighting for some time: the risk of a spillover of US demand at a time of growing spending by Canadian consumers and businesses; the possibility of rising inflation pressures in the United States and the implications for Canada; and the uncertain balance between demand and supply in the Canadian economy, given some signs that the pressures on capacity have not been as intense as expected earlier.
The performance of emerging-market economies has been better than expected.
In the Asian economies, which posted solid export led growth in 1999 after a slowdown caused by the financial crisis of 1997-98, growing domestic demand has contributed to continued strong expansion this year.
The emerging markets of Latin America and Eastern Europe are also showing strength.
In Europe, the economic expansion remains solid.
Strengthening employment and rising consumer and business confidence should stimulate domestic demand through the rest of the year.
Tightening monetary conditions in the region should help to forestall inflationary pressures.
In Japan, there are signs that the economy is improving.
Corporate profits, business investment, and production have all recently shown some strength.
Nevertheless, the economy remains fragile: household spending is weak, and the financial sector requires further restructuring.
This has led the Bank of Japan to maintain its policy of keeping the overnight interest rate at zero, for the time being.
The US economy continued to expand rapidly in the first half of 2000: GDP rose by 5 per cent (at an annual rate), following growth of 7 per cent in the second half of 1999.
This performance reflected particularly strong business investment throughout the period.
Nevertheless, in recent months, there have been some signs of slowing in interest-rate-sensitive sectors.
In particular, household and construction spending have slowed markedly from the very high levels seen earlier.
The labour market remains tight, despite a moderation in employment growth.
Continued strong productivity growth, however, has kept unit labour costs in check.
Past increases in interest rates are expected to slow demand growth through 2000 and 2001.
Nevertheless, the Federal Reserve may need to raise interest rates further if the high level of economic activity continues to put upward pressure on capacity and inflation.
The degree of tightening expected by financial markets has been revised down significantly because of recent signs of slowing in some sectors.
The average US dollar price of Canada's key primary commodities, as measured by the Bank of Canada's commodity price index, is down 1 per cent from its level at the end of April.
While the price of crude oil has risen, prices for other primary commodities have fallen by about 5 per cent.
At the end of the second quarter, despite two increases in OPEC production quotas, the price of crude oil remained substantially above that suggested in the May Report.
Even with the additional increase in output announced by Saudi Arabia in July, it is likely that retail prices of products derived from crude oil will be higher than expected through the summer.
The price of natural gas has also risen because of low stocks - reflecting strongly growing demand.
Despite strong global economic expansion, non-energy commodity prices have eased.
While some price declines can be attributed to temporary factors, declining lumber prices most likely resulted from slower-than-expected growth in US construction.
Growth in the Canadian economy has been at the high end of the range projected in the May Report.
Real GDP increased at an annual rate of 4.9 per cent in the first quarter of 2000.
Export volumes rose considerably, chiefly because of very strong growth in US demand.
Business investment remained buoyant, supported by high levels of profitability and confidence.
Substantial increases in household spending reflected marked gains in employment and real incomes.
The growth of import volumes did ease somewhat, mainly reflecting lower inventory accumulation.
Available information for the second quarter suggests that the economic expansion slowed but remained strong (and above the growth of potential output) at 3.50 to 4.25 per cent.
Indicators of consumer spending and of investment in machinery and equipment remained firm.
Data on exports showed further solid gains, with shipments of machinery and equipment up sharply in response to buoyant US demand.
There were, however, signs of an easing in household spending on interest-rate-sensitive items such as housing.
And employment gains also slowed in the second quarter.
Economic activity in 2000 is now expected to grow by between 4.25 and 4.75 per cent on an annual average basis, slightly more than envisaged in the May Report.
This chiefly reflects the upward revision to Canada's GDP in the second half of 1999 and the strong first half of this year.
For the rest of 2000 and for 2001, the Bank continues to project a slowing pace of activity, primarily reflecting an anticipated slowing in the US economy.
The strong performance of the Canadian economy might have suggested that Canada moved into excess demand in the first half of 2000.
However, several indicators suggest caution in making this judgment.
Most important among these is core inflation, which remains below expectations.
Nonetheless, it is clear that excess capacity is being rapidly absorbed, and with growth in demand expected to remain somewhat above that of potential output to the end of 2000, pressures on capacity are expected to increase.
The 12-month rate of increase in the core CPI in June, at 1.4 per cent, was down slightly from last March and below that projected in the May Report.
In particular, prices for both durable and semi-durable goods were weaker than anticipated, which may have partly reflected lower international prices.
These surprises also suggest that there was still slack in product markets in the early part of the year.
Other statistical measures of the trend rate of inflation were close to the core rate.
The estimated effect on the core CPI of the substantial rise in energy prices since early 1999 continues to be small - less than 0.1 per cent.
However, the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI in June, at 2.9 per cent, remained well above core inflation, reflecting continued hikes in energy prices at the consumer level.
There has been little change in indicators of wage increases.
The year-over-year increase in the average hourly wage (excluding overtime) for permanent workers, taken from Statistics Canada's Labour Force Information, was 3 per cent in July, down slightly from 3.2 per cent in the first half.
The year-over-year rise in labour income per person-hour was still only 1.7 per cent in the first quarter.
Finally, in the first five months of 2000, the average annual increase in wage settlements in the unionized private sector was 2.6 per cent, close to the average gain in 1999.
For the economy as a whole, the year-over-year rise in unit labour costs increased to 1.6 per cent in the first quarter, chiefly because of reduced growth in output per person-hour.
The year-over-year increase in output per person-hour is expected to rebound considerably in the second quarter, however.
As a result, the underlying year-over-year increase in unit labour costs should fall back.
(This excludes the effect of the federal government pay-equity settlements, which could add up to 1.5 per cent to labour income in the second quarter.)
Asset prices tend to be sensitive to expectations of inflation and economic growth.
In the late 1980s, for example, a surge in housing prices signalled the rise in core inflation.
The housing market has tightened moderately since the beginning of 2000.
The year-over-year rise in prices for existing homes (based on the Royal LePage index) was 6.4 per cent in the first quarter, up slightly from the rate observed in the preceding quarter.
The year-over-year increase in new home prices has also risen, although it was only 2.4 per cent in May.
Core inflation, while unexpectedly low in the second quarter, is still expected to rise gradually to about 2 per cent by early 2001.
This reflects two factors: emerging pressures in product and labour markets as growth in demand continues to outpace growth in potential supply, and longer-term inflation expectations that are staying close to the midpoint of the Bank's target range.
The resulting upward pressure on core inflation should be tempered somewhat by further reductions in import costs arising partly from the appreciation of the Canadian dollar since early 1999.
The rate of increase in the total CPI is still expected to move down towards core inflation, with the pace determined partly by how quickly crude oil prices decline and feed through to retail prices.
If crude oil prices average US$28 for West Texas Intermediate Core inflation is expected to rise gradually to about 2 per cent by early 2001.
during the second half of the year, the year-to-year increase in the total CPI should decline to about 2 per cent some time in the first half of 2001.
Growth in the narrow monetary aggregates continues to be strong.
On a year-over-year basis, M1 grew by about 17 per cent in June, while M1+ and M1++ were up some 12 per cent and 9 per cent, respectively.
The pace of growth has been boosted by sharp increases in non-personal accounts.
Part of the recent strength is due to an increase in the deposits of some financial intermediaries with banks.
These deposits are distorting the information content of the narrow aggregates because accounts held by financial institutions would net out if the monetary aggregates were constructed on a fully consolidated basis.
Our initial estimates suggest that when the data are adjusted to account for such distortions, the trend growth rate of the narrow aggregates is between 4 and 8 per cent.
When these data distortions are taken into account, the recent growth in narrow money suggests that real GDP will grow at a pace of about 3.5 per cent in the second half of 2000.
This is consistent with the Bank's overall projection of GDP growth.
The growth in narrow money also suggests that core inflation will increase to about the midpoint of the target range by early 2001.
This, too, is consistent with the Bank's projection.
Growth in the broad monetary aggregate M2++ has increased since the beginning of the year, posting a 12-month gain of nearly 9 per cent in June.
This increase largely reflects the acceleration in the narrow aggregates.
Overall, growth in M2++ is consistent with the path for inflation implied by the growth in narrow money.
Concerns about future pressure on capacity limits arising from strong domestic spending and from the continued buoyancy of external demand for Canadian products prompted the Bank to raise the Bank Rate by 50 basis points on 17 May, soon after the publication of the May Report.
This action, which took the Bank Rate to 6 per cent, followed a similar move by the Federal Reserve.
The Federal Reserve's move highlighted the vigour of the US economy and underscored the risk that US demand and inflation pressures could spill over into Canada.
Higher interest rates were deemed necessary to keep the future trend of inflation near the middle of the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent target range, thus contributing to sustained economic growth.
The timing and magnitude of the Bank Rate increase were largely anticipated by financial markets.
Most of the rise in the 90-day commercial paper rate occurred prior to the rate hike, as the financial community became increasingly convinced that the Bank would take such an action.
The Bank's move, therefore, had only a small impact on money market rates.
The US money market behaved in a similar fashion, with most of the rise in market rates occurring ahead of the Federal Reserve's action.
More recently, expectations of further increases in US official interest rates over the balance of 2000 receded, as market participants began to see signs of a possible slowing in the US economy.
North American bond yields drifted lower in the weeks following the central bank moves, as tighter monetary conditions reduced the perceived risk of a significant medium-term buildup in the trend of inflation.
These yields continue to be affected by the relatively small issuance of long-term government bonds.
Combined with investors' continuing demand, this reduced supply has resulted in an inverted yield curve for longer government maturities.
Since the completion of the May Report, the Canadian dollar has been affected by shifts in the expectations of financial markets concerning the relative robustness of the Canadian and US economic expansions.
The Canada/US dollar exchange rate fluctuated between a low of 66.04 cents and a high of 68.36 cents over the period.
The Canadian dollar weakened in mid-May because market participants felt that the Canadian economy would grow more slowly than the US economy.
Subsequently, the Canadian dollar strengthened against the US dollar when signs of a moderation in the US economic expansion began to emerge.
Fluctuations in the Canada/US dollar exchange rate were largely paralleled by those of the Canadian dollar trade-weighted exchange rate.
Economic fundamentals continue to support the Canadian dollar, since growth remains robust, and the current account has moved into surplus.
The Bank's monetary conditions index has fluctuated between -5.7 and -4.8 since mid-May.
Recoveries have taken hold in many emerging-market countries, and the Japanese economy, while still fragile, is showing more consistent evidence of sustained expansion.
In the euro area, growth has continued at a strong pace.
The US economy has also remained robust, but increases in official interest rates have contributed to some recent slowing.
Higher energy prices have already pushed up headline inflation rates in most countries and are likely to moderate the pace of economic expansion somewhat both this year and next.
The combination of strong global demand and increased likelihood that oil prices will remain above previously expected levels has heightened the risk that inflation rates in major industrial countries will continue to move up.
The prospect of higher inflation has already prompted many central banks to increase official interest rates.
In Canada, output growth in the first half of 2000, at a rate of about 5 per cent, exceeded expectations.
Despite this robust expansion, the trend of inflation has continued to come in below expectations.
While there are signs that the economy has begun to slow, the momentum of demand is still expected to increase pressures on capacity and to raise core inflation to the midpoint of the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent target range, but this is now expected to occur later in 2001.
In this environment, there are three main areas of uncertainty for Canada's economic outlook: demand growth in the United States, the current level and prospective growth of Canada's production capacity, and world energy prices.
Continued robust expansion of US demand for Canadian exports could lead to inflationary pressures here.
However, recent productivity gains and brisk investment in machinery and equipment raise the possibility that the economy's production potential may be higher than that incorporated into the Bank's outlook.
Finally, the longer energy prices remain high, the greater the risk that they could feed into the prices of other goods and services and into inflation expectations.
While the inflation-control target range is specified in terms of the total consumer price index , for the purpose of policy implementation the Bank uses the CPI excluding food, energy, and the effect of changes in indirect taxes - the core CPI - as its operational guide.
Since last March, core CPI inflation has remained in the lower half of the Bank's inflation-control target range and somewhat below the level projected in the May Report.
At the same time, because of further substantial increases in energy prices, the rate of increase in the total CPI has continued to be well above that of core inflation.
The 12-month rate of increase in the core CPI was 1.3 per cent in September, compared with 1.5 per cent in March.
The persistent, unexpectedly low level of core inflation is still concentrated in the prices of durable and semi-durable goods.
The prices of these import-intensive items fell over the past year, despite modest increases in the prices of imported non-energy consumer goods.
This suggests that the phenomenon of a reduced pass-through of changes in the exchange rate to consumer prices is continuing.
Competitive pressures in the retail sector have also remained intense and have contributed to discounting - especially on motor vehicles and household appliances.
More generally, the resulting negative surprise in core inflation is also consistent with the continued presence of some slack in product markets during the first half of the year.
Although core CPI inflation has remained stable, the rate of increase in the total CPI has fluctuated between 2 per cent and 3 per cent over the past six months.
Both the variability and the net upward movement in the rate of increase in the total CPI largely reflect surging energy prices.
This has pushed up the retail prices of both gasoline and fuel oil.
A jump in natural gas prices at the producer level has also contributed to a marked rise in prices at the consumer level.
Despite these broad-based energy-price increases, the first-round effects of higher energy costs on the core CPI remain small, and there is no evidence of second-round effects from inflation expectations.
The effect of the energy price increases on the level of the core CPI is estimated to have been less than 0.2 per cent since the end of 1998 and less than 0.1 per cent over the past year.
This increase largely reflects first-round cost-based effects on the prices of interurban transportation.
The phenomenon of low pass-through, also evident in the effects of exchange rate changes on the core CPI, may partly reflect the increased credibility of low-inflation policies.
After rising considerably in 1999 and into early 2000, the prices of non-energy commodities have eased since the beginning of May, in spite of the continued strong expansion of the global economy.
The appreciation of the US dollar against major currencies has been an important factor impeding further recovery in the US dollar price of many commodities.
Moreover, ample supplies have led to a decline in the prices of agricultural commodities.
Lumber prices have also come under considerable downward pressure, because of slower growth in US construction activity and excess capacity in the industry.
The substantial gains in the prices of Canada's energy commodity exports over the past year, together with the increase in the prices of non-energy commodities through to the end of the first quarter of 2000, largely explain why the annual increase in the chain price index for GDP (a broad price measure of the goods and services produced in Canada) remained well above that of core inflation at mid-2000.
Federal pay-equity payments also boosted the level of the chain price index for GDP by about 0.6 per cent in the second quarter.
After a gain of 5.8 per cent at an annual rate in the second half of 1999, Canada's real GDP rose at 4.9 per cent in the first half of 2000.
Thus, while growth eased slightly, it was still strong and well above the growth of potential output.
This growth in economic activity was led by increases in exports and in business investment in machinery and equipment.
For the third quarter of 2000, current information points to continued robust growth in a range of 3.5 to 4.5 per cent.
After growing rapidly in the first half of 2000, the US economy slowed in the third quarter.
Although growth of investment in equipment and software fell from the levels seen in previous quarters, it remained strong.
With solid US aggregate demand and the favourable competitive position of Canadian industry, growth in Canada's exports, particularly shipments of high-technology equipment, remained buoyant in the first half of 2000.
A further expansion in the volume of commodity exports also contributed to growth.
Early information suggests that exports expanded less rapidly in the third quarter.
High levels of consumer confidence and further gains in real disposable income supported household spending in Canada, which continued to grow substantially in the first two quarters of 2000, although at a slower pace than in the second half of 1999.
In particular, expenditures on interest-sensitive items such as housing and motor vehicles fell back in the first half of the year.
Information to date, however, suggests that spending on these big-ticket items recovered in the third quarter.
The increase in real personal income was supported by further gains in employment and by the one-time effect of the federal pay-equity settlements.
Capital expenditures by businesses rose rapidly in the first six months of this year, supported by further marked gains in profitability and high levels of confidence.
Spending on machinery and equipment continued to soar, with growth in the first half of the year averaging over 23 per cent at an annual rate, up from the 16 per cent rate registered in the second half of 1999.
This sustained increase in investment reflects the continued surge in demand for computers and related high-technology equipment.
Spending on structures, especially by the oil and gas sector, also rose considerably in the first half of this year.
Early indicators for the third quarter of 2000 point to further robust investment growth.
Against a background of vigorous demand, inventory investment edged down in the first half of 2000, suggesting that some of this strength was unanticipated.
Imports continued to expand sharply in the first six months of 2000, chiefly because of the heavy business investment in machinery and equipment.
Imports of industrial materials also rose considerably because of the marked increase in output needed to meet buoyant export demand.
Since imports rose somewhat less than exports, the trade surplus was up slightly in volume terms.
The terms of trade increased still further, largely because of rising energy prices.
Thus, the current account balance (in dollar terms) improved considerably in the first half of this year, averaging a surplus of 1.7 per cent of GDP.
Preliminary data suggest that the current account position in the third quarter of 2000 likely remained strong, with further gains in the terms of trade offsetting a reduction in the real trade balance.
Wage developments are particularly important when monitoring changes in aggregate costs, since labour costs account for more than half of total costs.
According to available indicators, wages appear to have increased by about 3 per cent in the first half of 2000.
Given recent growth in labour productivity, the underlying rise in labour costs remains consistent with core inflation staying well within the inflation-control target range.
The year-over-year increase in the average hourly wage (excluding overtime) for permanent workers was 3.5 per cent in the third quarter of 2000, up from 3.0 per cent in the fourth quarter of 1999.
Another broad measure of wage change, the underlying year-over-year increase in labour income per person-hour, was about 3 per cent in the second quarter of 2000.
The average annual wage increase in the unionized private sector was 2.3 per cent in the first eight months of 2000, down slightly from the average gain of 2.6 per cent last year.
Labour productivity, as measured by output per person-hour, strengthened considerably in the first half of 2000, increasing by over 2.5 per cent from the second quarter of 1999 to the second quarter of 2000.
The substantial gains in business expenditures on machinery and equipment in recent years may be starting to affect the trend rate of labour productivity growth.
This improvement in the growth of output per worker helped hold the increase in unit labour costs (excluding the effect of the federal pay-equity settlements) at mid-year to just over 1 per cent on a year-over-year basis.
The latest data provide a more optimistic assessment of the current level and prospective growth of potential output.
At the time of the May Report, various indicators suggested that the Bank's conventional estimate of potential output may have been underestimating the actual amount of aggregate capacity in the Canadian economy.
The most recent update of this measure of potential output now suggests that the Canadian economy was operating slightly below capacity output at the end of 1999, instead of close to three-quarters of one per cent above its production capacity, as indicated in the last Report.
Nonetheless, the revisions to the conventional measure now suggest that the economy may have moved into a position of excess demand in the first half of 2000, since aggregate output growth continued to outstrip the estimated expansion of capacity.
As always, it must be emphasized that there is a large degree of uncertainty around these estimates of the output gap.
And since the conventional measure adjusts with a lag, it carries an upside risk at times of increased technological change.
Adding to this risk is the surge in investment in computer and information technology since 1996 and the more intense restructuring of Canadian businesses in the 1990s.
Therefore, the Bank follows a broad range of capacity indicators.
Some of these other indicators suggest that there was still slack in product markets during the first six months of this year.
Chief among them is the fact that core inflation has been lower than expected.
Furthermore, the ratio of unfilled orders to shipments in the manufacturing sector was largely unchanged over the past year and is below the level reached in 1998.
In addition, robust growth in labour-force participation appears to be increasing the supply of labour as fast as demand, and underlying increases in unit labour costs have remained low.
A number of other indicators are more consistent with the view that the economy has now moved into excess demand.
The measured rate of capacity utilization in the non-farm, goods-producing sector in the second quarter of 2000 was above the level reached in the late 1980s.
There have also been reports of shortages of skilled labour, especially in the engineering, construction, transportation, and hospitality sectors.
And there is a risk that, because of the increased credibility of low-inflation policies, pressures on capacity may now take longer to be reflected in actual price and wage developments.
Overall, the weight of the evidence does not confirm the view that the economy had moved into excess demand by mid-year, but it points to an economy that is operating close to full capacity.
On 17 May, soon after the release of the May Report, the Bank of Canada raised the Bank Rate by 50 basis points to 6 per cent.
This action was deemed necessary to keep the future trend of inflation near the midpoint of the Bank's target range of 1 to 3 per cent so that the Canadian economy could continue to grow at a sustainable rate.
Since November 1999, the Bank Rate has risen by 125 basis points from the 4.75 per cent level maintained through much of last year.
The Bank's action in May, which followed a similar move by the US Federal Reserve, was prompted by concerns about future pressure on capacity limits arising from strong international and domestic demand for Canadian products.
Since the United States is a major source of demand for Canadian exports, the Fed's action in response to rapid growth in that economy underscored the continued risk that US demand and inflation pressures could spill over into Canada.
The Bank's decision to follow the Fed's move reflects the current similarities in cyclical conditions in the two countries, particularly the strong growth rates of aggregate demand.
There are, nevertheless, some significant differences between the two.
Since core inflation is lower in Canada than in the United States and since our economy has not been growing as quickly, or for as long, as theirs, the target for the Canadian overnight rate remains 75 basis points below the US target rate for federal funds.
The timing and magnitude of policy rate increases in both countries had been widely expected in financial markets, so that most of the rise in 90-day commercial paper rates occurred prior to the central bank actions.
Since then, 90-day paper rates have declined slightly, and financial market participants now generally expect rates to remain steady over the next few months.
Market participants interpret recent data as indicating that the US economy is slowing down, and they appear to believe that productivity gains will raise potential growth in both countries, reducing the need for further interest rate hikes.
North American bond yields declined following the central bank moves, as tighter monetary conditions reduced the perceived risk of an increase in inflation.
More recently, rising uncertainty in global financial markets has pushed US yields down relative to Canadian yields, and Canada/US spreads have turned slightly positive for maturities of 5 to 10 years.
While actual and anticipated reductions in government debt continue to put downward pressure on long-term government bond yields, the inversion of the yield curve for longer-term bonds is slightly less pronounced than it was at the time of the May Report.
The yield curve for Canadian corporate bonds, which has been less affected by the reduced supply of government debt, continues to have a normal positive slope.
The Canadian dollar has been affected by shifts in market expectations concerning the relative strength of the Canadian and US economies, the prospects for Canada/US interest rate differentials, and the recent volatility in global financial markets.
Recent weakness in the prices of non-energy commodities may also have negatively affected the Canadian dollar.
However, a low and stable inflation environment, the strength of real GDP, and the large current account surplus recorded in the second quarter have provided support to the Canadian dollar.
The US dollar has remained strong against most major currencies, as the US economy continues its robust growth with low inflation and substantial productivity gains.
More recently, it strengthened further, as nervous global investors have sought out US assets.
The Canadian dollar has also risen strongly against most other major currencies, gaining about 5 per cent against the British pound sterling since the beginning of the year and about 12 per cent against the euro.
During most of the past six months, the Bank's monetary conditions index fluctuated in a range of -5.5 and -5.0.
More recently, it has been in the -5.5 to -6.0 range, reflecting the fluctuation of the Canadian dollar against the US dollar.
The new system will improve the implementation and effectiveness of monetary policy by focusing attention on Canadian economic conditions and fostering a better understanding of central bank decisions.
Our analysis suggests that core CPI inflation in Canada will gradually rise and reach the midpoint of the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent target range in the second half of next year.
Assuming that world oil prices do not rise further from the high levels observed in recent months, the annual rate of increase in the overall CPI is expected to decline gradually towards the 2 per cent mark over that period.
However, several key uncertainties surround this projection.
Since mid-1999, global economic growth has become more synchronized and is showing strong momentum.
This development is tilting the balance of risks towards greater inflation pressures and could lead to increases in policy-determined interest rates in some countries.
Higher energy prices have not yet had a significant impact on world output growth.
The longer energy prices remain high, however, the more likely it is that they will adversely affect growth in countries dependent on oil imports.
High energy prices also add to the inflation risk through their possible effect on inflation expectations in some countries.
On the other hand, credibility gains made by various monetary authorities in recent years should help reduce this risk.
The recovery of many emerging-market economies from the 1997-98 financial crisis continues.
Strong increases in the volume of exports, particularly to the United States, initially accounted for much of the recovery in these economies.
More recently, however, domestic demand has strengthened significantly.
In the euro area, the pace of real GDP growth stabilized at about 3.5 per cent in the first half of 2000, and activity is expected to remain solid in coming quarters as domestic demand firms and the depreciation of the euro exerts a stimulative effect on exports.
The Bank expects real GDP growth in the euro area to be around 3.5 per cent in 2000 and 3 per cent in 2001.
The Bank of Japan raised its target for the overnight interest rate to 0.25 per cent in August, thus moving away from its "zero-interest-rate policy.
" The reduction in monetary stimulus was motivated by the surge in output growth in the first half of 2000 led by strong business investment and buoyant demand for Japanese exports.
Japan's recovery could be particularly affected by high oil prices because of its dependence on imported oil.
The Bank expects real GDP growth in Japan to be about 2 per cent in 2000 and 1.5 per cent in 2001.
Although the momentum of aggregate demand in the US economy remains strong, recent data indicate that overall growth has slowed, particularly in housing and non-residential construction.
While past interest rate increases are expected to further moderate growth, the high level of economic activity and a tight labour market continue to pose an inflationary risk.
Real GDP growth in the United States is expected to be about 5 per cent in 2000 and 3.0 to 3.5 per cent in 2001.
While higher oil prices could further reduce US real GDP growth, they could also prompt higher interest rates if inflation expectations are affected.
Even with modest recourse to the US strategic petroleum reserve, crude oil prices are expected to remain relatively firm through the winter but may ease as warmer weather arrives.
Prices for non-energy commodities are expected to move up, in line with growth in global demand.
Economic prospects for the United States are an important element in the economic outlook for Canada.
In particular, growth in Canadian exports is expected to ease over the next 18 months, in line with the projected slowing of the US expansion.
Reduced stimulus from the earlier depreciation of the Canadian dollar, as well as the recent weakness in non-energy commodity prices, should also act in the same direction.
Nonetheless, both the growth and level of exports are expected to remain high.
The strength in energy prices may also contribute to slower growth in the manufacturing sector, but could boost investment, exploration, and exports by energy producers.
Household spending in Canada is expected to grow at a robust pace, supported by favourable labour market conditions and recent decreases in personal income tax rates.
Recent equity market volatility and the effects of higher energy prices on disposable incomes could, however, temper spending plans.
The growth of business investment is expected to fall back from the very strong pace recorded over the past several quarters, but should continue to contribute strongly both to aggregate demand and to the economy's capacity to produce.
Import growth is also expected to ease, chiefly reflecting less rapid increases in exports and in the demand for investment goods.
The most recent consensus among private sector forecasters is for real growth in Canada's GDP (on an annual average basis) of 4.7 per cent for 2000 and 3.5 per cent for 2001.
At the time of the May Report, the consensus forecast called for growth of 4.1 per cent in 2000 and 3.1 per cent in 2001.
With the upward revision to growth in the second half of 1999 and the relatively strong performance of the economy in the first half of this year, the Bank expects Canada's output growth in 2000 to be close to 5 per cent.
For next year, the Bank sees output growth in Canada in a range of 3 to 4 per cent.
This is higher than the projected range for growth in potential output - 2.75 to 3.25 per cent.
This outlook implies that the Canadian economy would continue to take up remaining slack in the second half of this year and could move into excess demand in late 2000 or early in 2001.
The outlook, however, also incorporates a profile of decelerating output growth through 2001, consistent with the projected slowdown of the US economy.
When projecting the balance between demand and supply for 2001, there is uncertainty not only about the current level of potential output, but also about the growth rate of future production capacity.
While the growth of potential output could ratchet up if the benefits of new information and communications technology spread through a wide range of Canadian industries, the Bank is inclined to take a cautious approach to projecting a higher trend rate of potential growth.
Public expectations about the increase in the CPI over the near term have risen slightly as a result of higher energy prices.
To date, however, this has not significantly affected longer-term inflation expectations, which remain close to 2 per cent.
The Conference Board reported in its autumn Index of Business Confidence that 49 per cent of its regular business survey respondents expected prices, in general, to increase over the next six months at a rate of 2 per cent or less, and 92 per cent expected a rate of 3 per cent or less.
These percentages are down from a year ago, particularly for respondents expecting inflation of 2 per cent or less.
The downward movement implies that expectations of short-term inflation have increased and are now centred closer to the midpoint of the Bank's target range.
The average private sector forecast for the rate of increase in the total CPI is 2.7 per cent in 2000 (up from 2.3 per cent last spring) and 2.4 per cent in 2001 (up from 2.1 per cent last spring).
The differential between conventional bonds and Real Return Bonds has remained close to 2 per cent.
The supply factors affecting bond markets have made it difficult to extract reliable information from this measure.
It therefore cannot be inferred that long-term inflation expectations are exactly at the level implied by the differential.
Nevertheless, the differential does suggest that investors are confident that there will not be a long-run pickup in inflation.
The impact on the core CPI of this year's substantial hike in crude oil prices is still predicted to be small.
So far, the price effects have been largely restricted to air fares and local transportation costs.
While the risk of further pass-through of these higher costs to other components of the core CPI has increased because of their persistence, their effect is still expected to be modest.
Competition in the retail sector is likely to remain strong, and firms may try to economize on the use of energy.
Assumptions about crude oil prices, however, significantly affect the near-term outlook for the total CPI.
If crude oil prices are about US$30 per barrel for West Texas Intermediate by year-end, the year-to-year rise in the total CPI should ease to about 2.5 per cent in the first quarter of 2001.
By comparison, prices of US$35 per barrel and US$25 per barrel would imply a year-over-year increase in the CPI of about 3.4 per cent and 1.7 per cent, respectively, in the first quarter of 2001.
Wage increases are expected to be in line with productivity growth and projected inflation.
The Bank's September survey of industry associations suggests that wage increases will rise over the next 12 months.
The implications of higher wage growth for unit labour costs should be offset, to some extent, by rising growth in labour productivity, with the rate of increase in unit labour costs rising to a level consistent with projected inflation.
In the late 1980s, for example, a surge in housing prices preceded an upturn in core inflation.
In 1999, housing prices moved up noticeably, but there are some indications that activity in the housing market may be easing, partly in response to the increase in interest rates that has taken place since November 1999.
The year-over-year rise in prices for existing homes (based on the Royal LePage index) was 5.1 per cent in the second quarter, down slightly from the rate observed at the end of 1999.
On the other hand, the year-over-year increase in new home prices rose a little further to 2.4 per cent in August, largely because of higher costs for labour and construction materials.
Growth in the narrow money aggregates has slowed somewhat in recent months from the very rapid pace recorded in early 2000, but it remains strong on a year-over-year basis.
Year-over-year growth in gross M1 was about 17 per cent in September.
Part of this strength, however, stems from factors that raised the growth of M1 relative to that of underlying transactions balances.
Most notable in early 2000 was the increase in bank deposits of financial intermediaries.
As Technical Box 5 explains, our best estimate of the growth in underlying transactions balances is about 6 to 8 per cent.
Growth in M1+ and M1++ also remains robust on a year-over-year basis at 10 per cent and 8 per cent, respectively, but at a considerably lower rate than that of M1.
These aggregates are influenced, to some extent, by some of the special factors affecting M1.
When the special factors are taken into account, the recent pace of expansion in narrow money suggests that real GDP will grow at a rate of around 3.75 per cent in 2001.
This is broadly consistent with the Bank's overall projection.
The growth in narrow money aggregates also suggests that core inflation will be moving up to the midpoint of the target range towards the end of 2001.
The pace of expansion in the broad aggregate M2++ has been relatively stable over recent months.
Year-over-year growth in September was 8.3 per cent.
Growth in M2++ suggests a similar profile for core inflation as that implied by the narrow aggregates, consistent with inflation remaining within the target range.
Consumer credit continues to grow moderately, consistent with the outlook for sustained growth in consumer spending.
Total business credit has slowed over recent months but remains in line with continued strength in business activities in the near term.
Overall, the information coming from money and credit indicators is consistent with continued strength in real output and some pickup in core inflation.
A number of forces are expected to contribute to an upward movement in core inflation over the next year.
First, longer-term inflation expectations continue to be close to 2 per cent - more than one-half per cent above the current level of core inflation.
Second, with output growth projected to remain vigorous, capacity pressures in product and labour markets are expected to become more evident.
Third, wage increases are moving up.
The Bank therefore expects core inflation to rise gradually to 2 per cent in the second half of the next year.
If output growth through 2001 slows to a rate more consistent with the growth of potential output, as expected, core inflation should stabilize at about 2 per cent.
But there is some risk that the economy could grow more rapidly and move into a more persistent excess-demand situation next year, leading to further upward pressure on inflation.
Recent hikes in crude oil and natural gas prices are expected to keep the rate of increase in the total CPI close to 3 per cent for the rest of this year.
If oil prices were to stabilize at levels just below US$30 a barrel, the rate of increase in the total CPI would be expected to move down to about 2 per cent by the end of 2001.
The rise in energy prices has pushed up the total CPI, but core inflation has remained stable, in the lower half of the Bank's target range for inflation control, and below projected levels.
These developments suggest that the economy still had a margin of unused capacity in the first part of this year, and have led the Bank to raise its estimate of both the current level and the prospective growth of the production potential of the Canadian economy.
While there are signs that the economy has begun to slow, the momentum of demand is still expected to increase pressures on capacity.
Specifically, the Bank expects output growth to average close to 5 per cent this year and to slow to a range of 3 to 4 per cent in 2001.
As a result, core inflation is projected to rise to the 2 per cent midpoint of the Bank's target range in the second half of 2001.
To keep core inflation steady at 2 per cent, the economy would have to grow on average at a rate equal to the growth of capacity in subsequent years.
On the demand side, there is the possibility that continued robust growth of US demand for Canadian exports at a time of strong domestic demand could increase inflation pressures in Canada.
The rapid growth of M1 adds to this concern.
On the supply side, there is a chance that the strength of spending on machinery and equipment and the recent improvement in productivity gains may raise capacity limits beyond currently projected levels.
However, the Bank will continue to take a cautious approach to projecting potential output, updating its estimates as evidence accumulates.
With respect to inflation expectations, there is a risk that higher energy prices may feed into the prices of other goods and services and into expectations of future inflation.
In these circumstances of strong economic expansion, high levels of economic activity relative to capacity, and increased energy prices, the challenge for monetary policy will be to judge the balance between aggregate demand and supply, to guard against the risk that higher energy prices could affect core inflation and expectations of future inflation, and to adjust monetary conditions in a timely manner so as to preserve the low trend of inflation that has been benefiting the Canadian economy.
In its November Monetary Policy Report, the Bank's projection was for continued solid global economic expansion but with a noticeable slowing in 2001, particularly in the United States.
Since then, there has been accumulating evidence that global economic growth has begun to slow somewhat more and sooner than anticipated.
As a result, projections for growth in Europe and Japan have been revised downwards slightly for 2001.
For the United States, we now project growth at a rate of 2.0 to 2.5 per cent, one full percentage point below the range expected in the November Report.
This downward revision to the growth projection for 2001 primarily reflects a weaker first half, followed by a relatively strong rebound in the second half of the year.
Despite a slowing world economy and a deceleration in export growth, the pace of economic expansion in Canada remained solid in the second half of 2000, bolstered by strong domestic demand.
Indeed, growth in this period slightly exceeded the Bank's expectations.
Employment also grew rapidly, indicating significant momentum in the economy.
In spite of this starting position going into 2001, the Bank's projection for this year has been revised down to about 3 per cent - the bottom end of the 3 to 4 per cent range projected last November - because of spillover effects from a weaker US economy late in 2000 and in the first half of this year.
At 1.9 per cent, core inflation in December was marginally higher than anticipated.
Although some month-to-month volatility may result in core inflation rising temporarily above 2 per cent early this year, the Bank's baseline projection is for core inflation to steady out at about 2 per cent through this year.
With crude oil prices having declined to around $30 per barrel, it now seems likely that total CPI inflation, currently just above 3 per cent, will come down to around 2 per cent in the second half of 2001.
These developments over the past three months have altered the risks and uncertainties for Canada's economic outlook.
The slowdown now evident in the US economy
raises the issue of how marked that slowdown will be and how quickly the economy will rebound.
For Canada, an important question is the extent to which the current strength in domestic demand will continue to offset weaker US demand for our exports.
The recent decline in world oil prices has also somewhat reduced the risk that inflation expectations could heighten in response to rising headline rates of inflation.
At the same time, there continues to be some uncertainty regarding the future growth of the economy's productive capacity.
Recent productivity growth suggests that the economy's production capacity could be rising at a higher rate than the 3 per cent assumed by the Bank.
Nevertheless, current indicators point to an economy operating at close to full capacity.
Growth in the emerging-market economies has been somewhat faster than expected.
Nevertheless, the near-term outlook is still subject to a number of risks.
Market sentiment towards emerging markets in Asia has deteriorated over the past few months.
This deterioration stems largely from concerns about a possible downturn in global demand for electronic products, the impact of high world oil prices, political instability, and, in some cases, the slow pace of restructuring in corporate and financial sectors.
In addition, both Turkey and Argentina - two large international borrowers - have had to negotiate new IMF programs.
Some of these pressures on emerging-market countries will, however, be alleviated by lower interest rates in the United States and, for countries whose currencies are pegged to the US dollar, by its recent depreciation.
In the euro area, the pace of expansion slowed in the second half of 2000, partly owing to past increases in official rates by the European Central Bank.
In addition, surveys suggest a recent decline in both business and household confidence.
Indeed, household spending weakened significantly in the third quarter.
As a result, growth in the euro area in 2001 is now expected to be slightly below the 3 per cent projected in the November Report.
The Japanese economy remains fragile.
Real GDP rose only marginally in the second and third quarters of 2000, despite strong business investment.
Household spending has remained flat, reflecting weak income growth and concerns about employment prospects.
Moreover, the lagged effect of the appreciation of the yen has contributed to a marked slowing in export growth.
The Japanese economy is expected to grow at about 1.0 per cent in 2001 - lower than the 1.5 per cent projected in the November Report.
Recent developments indicate that the slowdown of the US economy has been more abrupt and more pronounced than anticipated.
Because that economy has been operating in excess demand, some slowdown is warranted to reduce inflationary pressures.
US real GDP rose by only 2.2 per cent in the third quarter of 2000, down sharply from previous quarters.
Employment growth has also slowed significantly in recent months, and average hours worked have fallen markedly.
Consumer spending (particularly for motor vehicles) and residential construction have eased in response to past increases in interest rates, declines in personal wealth associated with weakening stock prices, and higher energy prices.
At the same time, tighter credit conditions and lending standards have combined with reduced profit margins to restrain business investment.
The Bank now expects US real GDP to expand by 2.0 to 2.5 per cent, on average, in 2001.
Growth is expected to be particularly weak in the first half of the year, before rebounding relatively strongly in the third and fourth quarters.
Despite the slowdown in the US economy to a rate below that of potential growth, core inflation has not yet shown signs of easing.
The US economy continues to operate at a high level, as evidenced by the low unemployment rate.
Nonetheless, at its December meeting, in light of the slowing in the pace of activity, the Federal Open Market Committee shifted its forward-looking focus from heightened inflation pressures to economic weakness.
And in early January, the Committee made an intermeeting decision to lower its target federal funds rate by 50 basis points.
As of 23 January, financial markets were expecting that the US Federal Reserve would reduce its federal funds target by an additional 50 basis points at its end-January meeting and a further 50 basis points by mid-year.
Prices for crude oil and natural gas have been volatile since the end of October, driven by low inventories of petroleum products such as heating oil, by cold winter weather, and by short-term concerns over tensions in the Middle East.
On balance, however, oil prices have eased over the period, as the effects of increases in world supply have become more apparent.
Natural gas prices, while currently very high because of tight supplies and winter weather conditions, are also expected to ease somewhat this year.
Although cattle and grains prices have recovered, the US-dollar price of non-energy commodities has been below the Bank's previous expectations.
Real GDP rose at an annual rate of 4.8 per cent in the third quarter of 2000, above the upper end of the range projected in the November Report.
Once again, business investment in machinery and equipment increased considerably, reflecting further gains in profits.
Household spending also grew quite strongly.
Export volumes edged down, however, mainly owing to a marked slowing in the growth of US aggregate demand and to supply problems in the energy and automotive sectors.
This abrupt weakening in the growth of external demand for Canadian goods contributed to a substantial rise in inventories in the manufacturing sector.
For the last quarter of 2000, current information suggests that economic growth was in a range of 3 to 3.5 per cent.
A modest recovery in exports seems to have occurred, as the above-mentioned supply problems were resolved.
Residential construction appears to have risen considerably, while overall consumer expenditures were supported by a further rise in employment.
Spending on motor vehicles fell back, however, as dealer incentives became less attractive.
Early information also suggests that the pace of business investment eased substantially.
With higher-than-expected growth in the third quarter and small upward revisions to real GDP in the first half of the year, economic activity in 2000 is expected to have grown by 5 per cent on an annual average basis.
For 2001, the Bank is now projecting economic growth of about 3 per cent - the bottom of the 3 to 4 per cent range projected last November and about equal to the Bank's projected rate of potential growth for the economy.
This downward revision reflects the implications for Canada of a weaker US economy, especially in the first half of the year.
The strength of Canada's economic growth in the third quarter of 2000 and the monitored good performance in the fourth quarter suggest that the Canadian economy is operating at about full capacity, as projected in the November Report.
Statistics Canada's measured rate of capacity utilization for the non-farm, goods-producing sector in the third quarter was at about the same level as in the late 1980s.
There are continuing reports of skilled labour shortages in areas such as the high-technology and construction sectors.
As well, vacancy rates in the residential and commercial real estate sectors are very low.
Still, several indicators of pressures on capacity suggest that a small amount of slack remained in the second half of 2000.
For example, the level of inventories relative to sales has risen over the past year, and labour market participation rates have also continued to increase.
Overall, the full range of current indicators suggests that the economy is operating close to capacity.
The 12-month rate of increase in the core CPI was 1.9 per cent in December, up from 1.3 per cent in September and marginally above the expectations of the November Report.
The higher-than-anticipated level of core inflation partly reflected efforts by motor vehicle manufacturers and dealers to reduce price discounting.
The rise in core inflation in the fourth quarter may also be another indicator that the amount of slack in product markets has largely been absorbed.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI in December was 3.2 per cent.
This continued to be well above core inflation and reflected the substantial increase in energy prices at the consumer level over the past year.
While the first-round effects of higher energy costs on the core CPI have been minimal, recent announcements of fare increases in the transportation sector will likely affect consumer prices in 2001.
Based on the indicators in Chart 7, as well as on labour compensation per person-hour in the business sector, the underlying rate of increase in the average wage appears to have edged up to just over 3 per cent.
The year-over-year increase in output per person-hour in the business sector in the third quarter of 2000 was 2.1 per cent.
As a result, the year-over-year rise in unit labour costs in the business sector was held to 1.0 per cent.
Core inflation is now expected to steady out at close to 2 per cent through 2001, although month-to-month volatility may cause it to exceed that rate temporarily in the near term.
This outlook reflects longer-term inflation expectations remaining near 2 per cent and the economy staying broadly in balance between aggregate demand and supply.
If crude oil prices remain at or below US$30 a barrel, the year-to-year increase in the total CPI is expected to decline to about 2 per cent in the second half of 2001.
Growth in gross M1 slowed further in the fourth quarter.
The three-month growth rate of gross M1 fell to 7 per cent in December, well below the rates recorded earlier in the year.
Nevertheless, at 15 per cent, year-over-year growth in gross M1 remains strong.
The year-over-year rates of increase in M1+ and M1++ have held steady over the last three months, at about 12 and 10 per cent, respectively.
Special factors are keeping the rate of expansion of the narrow aggregates stronger than the underlying growth in transactions balances.
It is estimated that deposits of financial institutions with banks and deposits of businesses and individuals at investment dealers continue to account for about 3 percentage points of the year-over-year growth in gross M1.
If the various data distortions are taken into account, the recent expansion in narrow money suggests that real GDP will grow at about 4 per cent in 2001 - stronger than the Bank's projection for GDP growth.
The growth in the narrow money aggregates suggests that core inflation may move above the midpoint of the target range in 2001.
Year-over-year growth in the broad aggregate M2++ rose to 10 per cent in December.
The strength of M2++ suggests a profile for core inflation slightly above that implied by the narrow aggregates.
The Bank held the Bank Rate constant at 6.0 per cent on 5 December, its first fixed announcement date, and lowered it to 5 3/4 per cent on its 23 January announcement date.
Both decisions were largely anticipated by financial markets.
Markets expect further declines in short-term interest rates between now and mid-year.
Over the past three months, the monetary conditions index has fluctuated between -6.7 and -5.5, reflecting the combination of declines in short-term interest rates and some firming of the Canadian dollar.
The appreciation of the Canadian dollar in part reflects an adjustment of the US dollar against many major currencies in response to the slowdown of the US economy relative to other economies and the declines in US interest rates.
The term structure of interest rates on government debt has drifted lower in both Canada and the United States as market participants have become increasingly convinced that economic growth in the United States is slowing to a rate below potential.
Yield spreads between Canadian and US government securities turned modestly positive for maturities of 2 to 30 years late in 2000 and have remained so since then.
Credit conditions faced by Canadian borrowers have been tightening somewhat as lenders have become more risk-averse at this point in the economic cycle.
In the United States, credit conditions have generally tightened more than in Canada, likely reflecting market sentiment about the extent of the US economic slowdown.
Those conditions, reflected in credit spreads, have eased somewhat following the recent move by the Federal Since the peaks established last summer, most of the world's major stock market indexes have declined.
Movements in technology stocks have been particularly volatile.
More recently, while most stock markets have risen, they remain well below their earlier peaks and volatility persists.
Stock prices may now embody more realistic expectations of future profit growth, particularly in the technology sector.
At the same time, the volatility in stock prices may reflect market participants' uncertainty about the future prospects for global economic expansion.
At the time of the November 2000 Monetary Policy Report, although signs of the anticipated slowing of the US economy were becoming apparent, the momentum of the global economy was considered strong.
A weaker global economy, together with declines in energy prices from earlier peaks, has reduced the risk of inflationary pressures worldwide.
The abrupt easing in the pace of US economic expansion, particularly in the markets for motor vehicles and for information and telecommunications equipment, contributed importantly to a slowing in economic growth in Canada towards the end of last year and into 2001.
The pace of expansion in both the US and Canadian economies during the first half of this year is now projected to be much weaker than expected last November, as inventory imbalances in those sectors experiencing weaker demand are corrected.
As a result, the Canadian economy will probably be operating somewhat below capacity by mid-2001, suggesting some downward pressure on core CPI inflation over the remainder of the year.
To support a rebound in the growth of aggregate demand in the second half of this year and in 2002, the Bank of Canada lowered its Bank Rate by 25 basis points on the 23 January announcement date, by 50 basis points on 6 March, and by 25 basis points on 17 April.
These actions brought the Bank Rate down to 5.0 per cent and the target for the overnight rate to 4.75 per cent.
These moves were consistent with the policy objective of keeping inflation close to the midpoint of the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent target range over the medium term.
The main uncertainty facing the Canadian economy is the timing and strength of the rebound in the US economy.
While the Bank expects a significant pickup in US growth in the second half of 2001 and some further strengthening in 2002, the abruptness and extent of the slowdown highlight the downside risk that the rebound in aggregate demand in the United States may take longer to take hold.
Since last autumn, core CPI inflation has moved up to the mid-point of the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control target range slightly faster than expected.
The rate of increase in the total CPI has remained close to 3 per cent, reflecting primarily the increases in energy prices over the past year.
The 12-month rate of increase in the core CPI was 2.0 per cent in February, up from 1.3 per cent last September and marginally higher than projected in the November Report.
Other statistical measures of the trend rate of inflation were just below the core rate.
The rise in the core rate of inflation over the past six months was broadly based among the major components of the core CPI.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI has remained close to 3 per cent since last autumn, reflecting large increases in energy prices over the year.
While the rate of increase in fuel oil and gasoline prices has eased over this period, tight supplies of natural gas have led to a substantial jump in overall energy prices.
Food prices have also risen considerably in recent months, particularly for beef, pork, and vegetables.
To date, the pass-through of first-round effects from higher energy costs to the core CPI have remained small.
The estimated effect was less than 0.1 per cent over the past year and was most evident in the prices of both local and air transportation.
The surge in the prices of Canada's energy commodities between the end of 1999 and the end of 2000 helps to account for the substantial rise over that period in the chain price index for GDP relative to the core CPI.
The prices of non-energy commodities, after easing between May and October of last year, have remained steady in recent months.
The slowdown in world economic growth contributed to a further decrease in the prices of metals and pulp, but livestock prices have moved up in response to strengthening demand and reduced supplies in Europe (owing to foot-and-mouth disease).
The pace of Canada's economic expansion slowed in the final quarter of 2000, mainly in response to an abrupt slowing in US economic growth.
After increasing by 4.5 per cent on average over the first three quarters, real GDP in Canada rose at an annual rate of only 2.6 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2000.
With lower-than-anticipated growth in the fourth quarter and downward revisions to real GDP in the first three quarters of the year, economic activity in 2000 rose by 4.7 per cent on an annual average basis - less than the 5 per cent pace expected at the time of the February Update.
Available information suggests that real GDP growth for the first quarter of 2001 will be in a range of 1.25 to 2.25 per cent, with robust gains in final domestic demand partly offset by sluggish exports and further reductions in inventory investment.
The downturn in the US auto market led to reduced Canadian automotive exports and production in the fourth quarter of 2000 and in early 2001, as manufacturers began to bring inventory levels into balance.
This contributed to cutbacks in the output of related industries such as primary metals and motor vehicle parts.
In addition, as the rate of expansion of spending on machinery and equipment by US businesses fell sharply, the growth in Canadian shipments of electronic products and other machinery and equipment eased considerably from the extremely buoyant pace of the first half of the year.
Concerned about high inventory levels, Canadian manufacturers of electrical and electronic products have reduced their rates of production.
Investment in capital goods by Canadian business, particularly in highly import-intensive computers and other machinery and equipment, appears to be recovering after falling off in the last three months of 2000.
In contrast, household expenditures remained robust through year-end and into 2001, supported by continued high levels of consumer confidence, solid employment growth, and federal and provincial government tax reductions.
A number of indicators support the view that pressures in product and labour markets intensified during the first three quarters of last year, and that the Canadian economy was operating in excess demand during the second half of last year.
The increases in core inflation and in wage rates over the past six months are consistent with this view.
The Bank's conventional measures of potential output and the output gap also suggest that the Canadian economy was operating slightly above potential output at the end of 2000.
Statistics Canada's measured rate of capacity utilization in the non-farm, goods-producing sector in the fourth quarter of 2000 was only slightly below the level reached in the late 1980s, when pressures on capacity were high.
Vacancy rates in the apartment and commercial real estate markets are also below previous lows reached in the late 1980s.
More recent indicators, however, point to capacity pressures easing in early 2001.
Consistent with the slowing we have seen in the pace of activity to below the economy's growth potential, the estimated output gap would be approaching zero in the first quarter of 2001.
The ratio of unfilled orders to shipments in the manufacturing sector has fallen in recent months.
Purchasing managers have reported reductions in delivery time, and the level of inventories relative to sales has risen.
Finally, anecdotal reports of labour shortages have diminished since December, although upward wage pressures persist in certain sectors and professions.
Overall, the full range of indicators suggests that the economy was operating at, or slightly above, full capacity at the end of last year, but that these pressures have eased through the first half of 2001.
Based on both the average hourly earnings of permanent workers and labour compensation per person-hour in the business sector, it appears that the underlying rate of increase in average labour compensation moved up into a range between 3.25 and 3.75 per cent in the second half of 2000 and into the early part of 2001.
The rise in labour compensation per person-hour in the business sector last year was boosted by unusually large bonus payments.
Labour productivity growth eased considerably in the second half of 2000 as a result of the slowdown in economic expansion, with output per person-hour in the business sector increasing by only 0.7 per cent between the fourth quarter of 1999 and the fourth quarter of 2000.
As a result, the year-over-year rise in unit labour costs in the business sector was 3.1 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2000.
It is often the case that large movements in real estate prices, which typically reflect shifts in both inflation expectations and economic growth, precede substantial changes in core inflation.
The year-over-year increase in the selling price of existing housing (based on the Royal LePage index) was 4.4 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2000, down somewhat from the rate seen at the end of 1999.
The 12-month rise in new-home prices remained steady at 2.4 per cent in February.
Gains in the prices of non-residential commercial properties last year were moderate and slightly higher than in 1999.
Since the November Report, the Bank Rate has been lowered on three occasions by a total of 100 basis points.
The timing and magnitude of the policy-rate declines had been largely anticipated in financial markets.
Indeed, reductions in the 90-day commercial paper rate occurred prior to the central bank actions.
Since November, the 90-day paper rate has declined by about 125 basis points to around 4.65 per cent and embodies expectations of further Bank Rate reductions of about 25 basis points by the end of the second quarter.
In the United States, financial market participants expect the Federal Reserve Board to lower the federal funds target rate by about an additional 50 basis points by the end of the second quarter in addition to the 150 basis points of cuts so far this year.
Yield spreads between Canadian and US government securities turned positive for maturities of 2 to 30 years in late 2000, and subsequently widened out.
This is consistent with market expectations of a sharper slowdown in the United States than in Canada, but it also reflects an increased preference for US-dollar assets, as global investors have sought the safety and liquidity of US financial markets at a time of uncertainty.
This shift in investor sentiment has also been reflected in the strength of the US dollar against all major currencies.
A number of recent developments have been behind this change in sentient: volatility in global equity markets; the slowdown in the global economy; the situation in several emerging-market economies; and concern about the direction of macroeconomic and structural policies in certain industrial countries.
Primarily reflecting these market swings, the Canadian dollar has declined from about 67 cents at the turn of the year to around 64 cents more recently.
Compared with other major currencies, however, the Canadian dollar has remained quite firm.
With declining short-term interest rates and a lower Canadian dollar, monetary conditions have eased substantially since the November Report.
The end of 2000 also saw a general tightening in North American financial conditions.
As investors became more concerned about prospects for economic growth, risk premiums rose and credit standards tightened, particularly in the United States.
Yields on corporate bonds climbed, not only for lower-quality bonds, but also for blue-chip issues.
The stock market was also affected as the correction in technology stocks continued.
There have, however, been signs of improvement in financial conditions more recently, partly because of interest rate cuts by both the US Federal Reserve and the Bank of Canada.
There appears to be underlying confidence that policy actions will limit the extent of the economic slowdown as evidenced by the yields on medium - and longer-term Canadian government bonds, which have fallen less than yields on short-term bonds (and, in some cases, have even increased).
Reflecting the past tightening in financial conditions, growth in Canadian business credit has slowed in recent months.
Moreover, with increased uncertainty over the economic outlook, firms are favouring longer-term financing.
As a result, growth in short-term business credit was quite weak in January and February, but growth in bonds has been picking up.
Investors have also shifted funds from equity markets into bonds, leading to a decline in bond rates.
Weakness in short-term business credit may also reflect lower demand for financing, stemming from a slower pace of inventory investment and a decline in the number of mergers and acquisitions.
For example, the International Monetary Fund now projects world output to expand by just over 3.0 per cent this year - down a full percentage point from its outlook last autumn.
Its current projection for 2001 compares with actual world economic growth of 4.8 per cent in 2000, 3.4 per cent in 1999, and 2.6 per cent in 1998 (at the height of the Asian crisis).
Last November, the anticipated slowing in US economic growth in response to earlier increases in interest rates and persistently higher energy prices appeared to be underway.
In fact, the slowdown has turned out to be greater than expected.
Average growth in the last two quarters of 2000 was only 1.6 per cent, less than one-third of the pace recorded in the first two quarters of the year.
Business investment has weakened, following reductions in corporate profits, tightening in business credit conditions, and substantial declines in equity markets.
Falling equity prices, lower employment growth, and high energy prices have also caused sharp declines in consumer confidence and reduced consumption growth.
This weakness in demand has led to product cutbacks in the manufacturing sector, primarily in automobiles and electronics (telecommunications and computer equipment) to correct inventory imbalances.
While new inventory-management techniques have resulted in lower general inventory levels in recent years, they have also allowed firms to quickly adjust production when excess inventories become apparent.
The current slowdown in manufacturing production is thus expected to be relatively short, with stronger growth projected for the second half of the year and into 2002.
Indeed, the inventory correction in the automobile sector was well advanced by the end of the first quarter.
Other factors that are expected to contribute to a pickup in the second half include lower energy prices and the decline in interest rates, both of which should help to restore consumer and business confidence.
If, however, there was continued weakness in consumer and business confidence, this could translate into lower spending and delayed recovery.
Overall, it is the Bank's assessment that the US economy will grow by between 1.0 to 2.0 per cent on an annual average basis this year, with growth in the second half of the year averaging 2.0 to 3.0 per cent.
In 2002, the Bank projects US economic growth of 2.5 to 3.5 per cent.
In Japan, economic recovery continues to be restrained primarily by ongoing problems associated with financial sector restructuring.
These problems, together with the impact of the slowdown in the United States, brought growth in the second half of 2000 down near zero, and only a small positive growth rate is projected for 2001.
The major European economies, by contrast, continue to exhibit positive momentum although at a somewhat slower pace, with growth in 2001 expected to centre on 2.5 per cent.
Growth in the emerging-market economies, particularly in Latin America and in those Asian economies that are heavily dependent on the manufacture of electronics, has been adversely affected by the US slowdown.
As well, both Turkey and Argentina face financial difficulties and are working with the IMF on new policy initiatives.
Crude oil prices are likely to ease further through 2001, as inventories are rebuilt and demand softens with the recent slowdown in the pace of world economic activity.
Natural gas prices are also expected to fall from their current high levels in coming months, given the expected replenishment of stocks.
With some lessening in the growth of global demand, prices for non-energy commodities are unlikely to rise appreciably through the remainder of 2001.
The Bank continues to project a strengthening of Canadian economic growth in the second half of this year and in 2002.
This view reflects a number of factors: a second-half rebound in the US economy; the completion of the inventory correction; continued investment in new technology by businesses; recent tax cuts; and the easing in domestic monetary conditions.
Reductions in personal income taxes, which took effect at the beginning of this year, as well as recent decreases in interest rates, should both contribute to fairly robust growth in household spending.
There is some risk that slower employment growth and recent drops in equity prices could weaken consumer confidence, tempering increases in household expenditures.
In the early part of 2001, however, the pace of household spending remained strong.
Firms are expected to focus on capital projects that help reduce costs, although investments to raise Canada's future capacity to supply energy should grow strongly during the year.
Further reductions in inventory investment to bring stock levels into balance are likely in the first half of this year.
Import growth is also expected to ease during this period, chiefly reflecting limited gains in both aggregate exports and investment in machinery and equipment.
Canadian export growth is expected to be modest in the first half of 2001, in line with the anticipated sluggishness of the US economy and the continued weak prices projected for non-energy commodities.
In particular, automotive shipments to the United States are likely to fall further during the period, while the growth in exports of information and communications equipment is expected to ease considerably.
Canadian export growth should improve, after mid-year, with the projected recovery in the US economy.
The latest consensus among private sector forecasters for real GDP growth this year (on an annual average basis) has been revised down to 2.4 per cent, considerably lower than the 3.5 per cent recorded at the time of the November Report.
For 2002, the most recent consensus forecast calls for real GDP growth of 3.3 per cent.
Since the February Update, the economic information on the first half of 2001 has been mixed, with both positive and negative indicators.
On balance, the data confirm the slowdown in the first half of the year anticipated in the Update.
It now looks as if growth over the first six months will average between 1.25 and 2.25 per cent.
For the second half of the year, we see growth picking up significantly to between 2.5 and 3.5 per cent.
Based on this first-half/second-half profile, together with the downward revision to GDP in 2000, the Bank's projection for economic growth in 2001 (on an annual average basis) has been revised down to between 2 and 3 per cent.
The pace of activity in 2002 is expected to be somewhat stronger than in the second half of 2001, with the economy expanding at a rate slightly above the Bank's estimate of potential output growth of 3 per cent.
This outlook is not expected to be materially affected by forthcoming changes in the measurement of GDP.
In the regular survey reported in the Conference Board of Canada's winter Index of Business Confidence, 52 per cent of respondents expected prices, in general, to rise over the next six months at a rate of 2 per cent or less, and 92 per cent expected a rate of 3 per cent or less.
The average private sector forecast for the rate of increase in the total CPI is 2.4 per cent in 2001 (the same as last autumn) and 2.1 per cent in 2002.
Typical forecasts of longer-term inflation are between 1.9 and 2.1 per cent, depending on the horizon.
The differential between conventional bonds and Real Return Bonds has widened to slightly above 2 per cent in recent months.
The supply factors affecting government bond markets continue to make it difficult to extract precise information from this measure.
Nevertheless, the differential does not suggest any marked change in long-run inflation expectations since the November Report.
The pass-through to the core CPI of the substantial increases in the prices of crude oil and natural gas over the past two years is expected to exert some upward pressure on inflation, although this effect is expected to be modest and spread over several years.
To date, the price effects have been most evident in airfares and local transportation costs.
Movements in the prices of crude oil and natural gas will, however, continue to substantially affect the near-term outlook for energy prices at the consumer level and therefore for the total CPI.
If crude oil prices remain below US$30 per barrel this year, gasoline and fuel oil prices are likely to fall below year-earlier levels during the second half of the year.
On the other hand, both natural gas and electricity prices at the consumer level are expected to be much higher this year than in 2000.
The depreciation of the Canadian dollar since the beginning of last year is also a potential source of upward pressure on inflation over the next year and a half.
It is unclear, however, how important this risk to inflation might be, since earlier episodes of large changes in the exchange rate during the 1990s were characterized by low exchange rate pass-through to the CPI in Canada and in many other industrial countries.
Despite slower output growth in some sectors, labour markets remain tight and profitability was very high at the end of last year, suggesting that wages will continue to grow at, or slightly above, current rates.
Moreover, feedback from businesses contacted by the Bank's regional offices indicates that wage increases are expected to rise over the next 12 months.
Productivity gains over the current period of economic slowdown may also be modest, implying that increases in unit labour costs are likely to stay relatively high in the first half of the year.
The money aggregates suggest a somewhat stronger outlook for output and inflation than the Bank's overall projection.
Although there has been some slowdown in the narrow aggregates in recent months, growth remains strong.
On a year-over-year basis, growth in gross M1 was about 14 per cent in February, while growth in M1+ and M1++ was 11 and 8 per cent, respectively.
A number of special factors continue to raise the growth of M1 relative to that of transactions balances.
Our current assessment of underlying growth is between 6 and 8 per cent.
When judgment is applied to take into account various data distortions and the slowing in the US economy, the indicator models based on narrow aggregates would suggest real GDP growth of about 3 per cent in 2001.
The model based on narrow money currently forecasts core inflation to rise above 2 per cent in 2001.
Forecasts based on the broader aggregate M2++ give a similar profile.
Growth in M2++ has continued to be boosted by net contributions to mutual funds.
Year-over-year growth in M2++ is about 10 per cent.
The expected re-emergence of a modest degree of excess supply in the economy this year should contribute to some downward pressure on core inflation over the remainder of 2001.
Two factors, however, are expected to limit the impact of excess supply on the core rate this year.
Second, wage increases are expected to remain steady, or possibly even edge up if current pressures in some sectors and professions become more widespread, while productivity growth may ease, thus putting upward pressure on unit labour costs.
On balance, it seems likely that core inflation over the remainder of this year will average somewhat below 2 per cent.
In 2002, with the economy projected to grow above potential, these pressures should reverse, with core inflation moving back to 2 per cent towards the end of the year.
The rate of increase in the total CPI, currently close to 3 per cent, is expected to move down to 2 per cent by the end of 2001, on the assumption that world energy prices remain close to current levels.
At this time, the key issue in the conduct of monetary policy in Canada is the extent of the current slowdown in the pace of economic activity stemming primarily from developments in the United States.
The slowdown in economic growth in Canada late last year and in the first half of 2001 has been greater than expected, and the automotive, electrical, and electronic manufacturing sectors in particular, have had to make significant adjustments.
It remains the Bank's view that after a first-half slowdown, economic growth will pick up in the second half of the year and in 2002.
The latest economic and financial developments support this view.
Recent data point to continued growth in overall activity.
In addition, current developments are consistent with the view that weakness associated with inventory adjustment will be concentrated in the first half, that business investment in new technology will continue, and that the easing in monetary conditions will support growth.
Consistent with this projection for output growth, the Bank sees the development of some downward pressure on core inflation, which will likely average somewhat below 2 per cent over the remainder of this year.
If recent large wage increases in some sectors and professions became more widespread, however, they could work to offset this tendency.
The anticipated downward pressure on core inflation this year should reverse through 2002 as the economy expands at a rate above its growth potential.
The main risk to this outlook for the Canadian economy is the possibility that the US slowdown could be more protracted than anticipated.
For example, if consumer and business confidence in the United States does not improve, this could lead to weaker consumption and investment spending.
The Bank's outlook for inflation and overall economic activity in Canada to the end of 2002 has not changed fundamentally from that presented in the May Monetary Policy Report.
The pace of economic expansion, after falling below the economy's growth potential in the first half of this year, is expected to begin to strengthen in the third and fourth quarters and to pick up further to slightly above potential growth in 2002.
Most of the factors supporting this outlook continue to be those discussed in the May Report - an expected strengthening in US economic growth, substantial progress in adjusting inventory levels in key sectors of the economy, the easing that has taken place in domestic monetary conditions, and tax cuts boosting Canadian disposable incomes.
Since the spring, however, several important factors have changed relative to earlier expectations.
In the United States, recently introduced tax cuts (which include rebates beginning in July) are expected to boost household spending and provide an offset to the weakness in capital investment that is now projected to last through year-end.
In addition, economic conditions outside North America have weakened and the financial difficulties facing several emerging-market economies have intensified.
The cumulative effects of policy actions taken in both Canada and the United States since the beginning of the year are working to counter spillover effects from abroad.
With the slowdown in the first half of 2001 easing pressures on capacity, core inflation is expected to decline to around 2 per cent in the second half of the year.
It is then projected to steady out at that rate through 2002 as the pace of economic activity in Canada strengthens.
Total CPI inflation is also expected to move down to about 2 per cent by the end of this year.
Recent declines in the prices of gasoline, natural gas, and crude oil have reduced the risk that the high energy prices experienced earlier this year could have broader pass-through effects on Canadian consumer prices.
On 29 May, the Bank lowered its target for the overnight rate of interest by 25 basis points, and on 17 July it lowered the target by a further 25 basis points to 4.25 per cent, bringing the cumulative decline since the beginning of the year to 150 basis points.
These decisions were judged to be consistent with keeping inflation close to the inflation-control target rate of 2 per cent over the medium term, thereby contributing to sustained economic and employment growth in Canada.
Real GDP growth in Canada averaged 2.1 per cent at an annual rate over the fourth quarter of last year and the first quarter of this year, compared with 4.2 per cent over the first three quarters of 2000.
This marked slowdown resulted primarily from reduced US demand for Canadian products, especially automobiles and telecommunications equipment, and from lower Canadian investment in machinery and equipment.
Over the same period, activity in the oil and natural gas sector rose strongly, supported by high levels of profitability.
In addition, household spending continued to show underlying momentum, sustained by further employment growth and by tax reductions by both the federal and provincial governments.
Based on the latest available indicators, the same trends continued through the second quarter of the year, with GDP growth estimated to have been in a range of 1 to 2 per cent (at an annual rate).
While growth in household spending appears to have slowed, it has, nonetheless, remained relatively robust.
Exports recovered somewhat, but reductions in inventory investment continued, and capital spending by businesses has remained weak.
The slowdown in the pace of activity through mid-year has eased pressures on production capacity.
It is estimated that the economy moved from a position of excess demand at the turn of the year to one of slight excess supply in the second quarter.
Core inflation was 2.3 per cent in May, up from 1.7 per cent in February and higher than had been expected in the May Report.
The rise in core inflation was associated with an economy operating at or above capacity at the end of 2000.
Core inflation had been held down temporarily early this year as a result of increased price discounting by motor vehicle manufacturers and dealers and by a special provincial government credit program for electricity customers in British Columbia.
Other statistical measures of the trend rate of inflation have been broadly in line with the Bank's core measure of inflation.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was 3.9 per cent in May, well above the rate of about 3 per cent experienced since the autumn of 2000.
In addition to the factors affecting core inflation, the rate of increase in the total CPI was boosted by a jump in natural gas prices (resulting from continued tight supplies as well as the termination of an Alberta government assistance program), and by a temporary spike in gasoline prices.
Despite broad-based increases in energy prices over the last two years, the estimated pass-through of higher energy prices to other components of the total CPI has been limited - less than 0.1 per cent over the past year.
In June, prices for gasoline fell back considerably.
This is expected to be an important factor in bringing total CPI inflation for June down noticeably from May.
Moreover, spot and futures prices for both crude oil and natural gas have also fallen, pointing to lower consumer prices for energy products in coming months.
The recent declines in the prices of gasoline, crude oil, and natural gas reflect a better balance between supply and demand as softening demand has allowed stocks to build up again.
Although economic indicators have remained mixed, they have, on balance, been stronger than expected by financial markets and have led to a somewhat more positive sentiment regarding the outlook for the Canadian economy.
In particular, concerns about a further substantial deterioration of the US economy have lessened since the May Report.
As a result, yields on medium-term Canadian bonds have increased since mid-April.
In the context of a slowing global economy, the continuing relative strength of Canada's economic fundamentals has contributed to a rise in the trade-weighted value of the Canadian dollar since early April.
This has reflected primarily a rise against major currencies other than the US dollar.
More recently, uncertainties associated with developments in some emerging-market economies have led to increased volatility in exchange markets.
The Bank's outlook for economic growth in Canada in 2001 and 2002 remains very close to that of the May Report.
Real GDP growth in 2001 is still expected to be in a range between 2 and 3 per cent.
Following moderate growth in the first and second quarters, real GDP is expected to rise at an annual rate of between 2.5 and 3.5 per cent in the second half of 2001.
In 2002, the pace of Canada's economic expansion will likely be slightly higher than the Bank's estimate for potential output growth of about 3 per cent.
The factors that support this outlook continue to include: substantial progress in adjusting inventory levels, a turnaround in business investment (including continued high levels of investment in the energy sector), the easing in domestic monetary conditions, domestic tax cuts, and the expectation of a modest recovery in US economic growth.
Employment growth, however, is likely to lag the pickup in activity, and thus job gains are likely to be modest through the summer months.
The US economy is still expected to strengthen in the second half of 2001 as a result of the significant declines in interest rates, the impact of announced tax cuts (which include rebates beginning in July), and a reduced rate of inventory liquidation.
Although business investment (especially in telecommunications technology) is now expected to remain weak for a longer period than was anticipated at the time of the May Report, consumption is projected to be stronger, owing to the introduction of the tax reductions and associated rebates.
Together with the slightly stronger-than-anticipated momentum at the beginning of the year, which was bolstered by automobile purchases, these factors should support US economic growth for 2001 in the upper half of the 1 to 2 per cent range indicated in the May Report.
In 2002, growth is projected to average 2.5 to 3.5 per cent (the same as in the May Report).
The outlook for economic growth in the overseas economies has, however, weakened from earlier expectations, in part because of adverse spillover effects from the slowdown in the US economy.
Growth in the European economies has softened, while Japan's situation has deteriorated further, reflecting in part the structural problems facing that economy.
The near-term outlook for emerging-market economies has also weakened, and uncertainties persist around the situations in Argentina and Turkey.
In response to the slowdown in world economic growth, the US-dollar price of non-energy commodities is projected to ease over the remainder of the year.
The surge in lumber prices, which boosted the Bank of Canada's index in the second quarter, has partially reversed in response to inventories returning to more normal levels.
However, lumber prices are likely to remain volatile.
It is estimated that some slack emerged in the Canadian economy by the second quarter of 2001.
This should lead core inflation to decline from 2.3 per cent in May to about 2 per cent in the second half of 2001, in line with long-term inflation expectations.
With the economy expected to expand next year at a rate slightly above its growth potential, slack should be eliminated and core inflation should steady out at around 2 per cent through 2002.
With the prices of many energy commodities down significantly from earlier peaks, the year-to-year rise in consumer energy prices should fall through the autumn.
As a result, total CPI inflation should move down to about 2 per cent by the end of 2001.
In preparing its outlook for inflation, the Bank examined the recent behaviour of the monetary and credit aggregates, as well as other indicators of pressure on inflation and production capacity.
The monetary aggregates continue to suggest a stronger outlook for growth and somewhat higher inflation than the Bank's overall projection.
Growth in the narrow aggregates has been greater than expected since February but remains well below the rates experienced at the end of 2000.
Part of the recent strength in the narrow aggregates likely reflects a temporary increase in the precautionary demand for money.
In the face of stock market uncertainty and concerns over future income, firms and individuals may be choosing to hold a higher level of liquid deposits.
To the extent that this increase in deposits will be used to purchase savings vehicles once uncertainty is reduced, it should not lead to inflationary pressures.
While money growth has been a little stronger than expected, growth in business credit - particularly short-term credit - was weaker than expected.
The slowing partly reflects a tightening in credit conditions for certain sectors, especially telecommunications.
Household credit has continued to grow at a moderate pace.
Several indicators have been consistent with the view that pressures on production capacity eased in the first half of 2001.
The ratio of unfilled orders to shipments in the manufacturing sector (excluding the aerospace industry) has decreased over the past year, and manufacturers' inventories have risen considerably relative to sales.
Moreover, while the unemployment rate has risen only slightly since mid-2000, the recent decline in the help-wanted index indicates an easing in the labour market.
The Bank's most recent survey of firms also suggests that capacity pressures and labour shortages were less intense than at the end of 2000.
Other indicators, however, suggest that capacity pressures in product and labour markets persisted into the early part of this year.
In labour markets, certain areas, notably health services and trades, continued to experience pressures.
Based on the average hourly earnings of permanent workers, the underlying rate of increase in labour compensation moved up slightly to a range of 3.5 to 4.0 per cent in the second quarter of 2001 from a range of 3.25 to 3.75 per cent in the second half of 2000.
In addition, Statistics Canada's measured rate of capacity utilization for the non-farm, goods-producing sector in the first quarter of 2001 was still well above normal levels, although it had eased since mid-2000.
Vacancy rates in the commercial real estate sector were also at very low levels in the first quarter of 2001.
Between the first quarter of 2000 and the first quarter of 2001, output per person-hour in the business sector fell 0.2 per cent, and unit labour costs rose 1.9 per cent.
While productivity growth is expected to rise as the economy gains momentum, increases in unit labour costs are likely to remain in the 2 to 3 per cent range over the near term.
Two major issues dominate the analysis and policy discussion in this Monetary Policy Report: the nature and extent of the global economic slowdown that began late last year and the consequences of the terrorist attacks in the United States.
Together, these factors have made the economic outlook considerably more uncertain than usual.
The global nature of the economic slowdown that began in the United States in the second half of last year became increasingly evident through the summer of 2001.
Although Japan had already been experiencing a period of protracted weakness, it was only around mid-year that evidence began to indicate that worldwide economic activity was slowing rapidly.
These include the earlier tightening of monetary policy, the sharp rise in world energy prices, and the adjustments resulting from excess production and additions to capacity in the information and telecommunications sectors.
This last factor - a classic investment cycle - has been a much stronger force than was initially recognized.
The economic consequences of the horrific events of 11 September are very difficult to assess.
There has been a clear and immediate impact, particularly in North America, on transportation, finance, and tourism.
But the size and duration of the effects are hard to gauge accurately.
Even more problematic are the implications for consumer and business attitudes.
While history offers some benchmarks, these events are unparalleled in North America.
Only with additional time and data will the consequences of these events become more fully understood.
In this Report, we analyze the factors behind the global economic slowdown that was evident prior to 11 September (taking into account the implications of significant revisions to US GDP and productivity data).
We also provide the Bank's first assessment of the potential consequences of the terrorist attacks for the North American economy through 2002.
While preliminary and subject to a wide band of uncertainty, this analysis will guide our reasoning and our judgment, as more data become available, about the implications for the Canadian economy, inflation, and monetary policy.
Since last February, core CPI inflation has risen to slightly above the midpoint of the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control target range.
At the same time, the rate of increase in the total CPI has come down towards core inflation, primarily reflecting reductions in gasoline prices.
Core inflation rose above 2 per cent in April and hovered around 2.3 per cent through the spring and summer, somewhat higher than projected in the May Report.
Other statistical measures of the trend rate of inflation were either the same or slightly lower than the core rate, suggesting that the underlying trend of inflation is unlikely to be above the core rate.
The rise in core inflation above 2 per cent is consistent with the lagged effects of an economy that was still operating just above capacity earlier this year.
The increase in the core rate was also magnified by the fact that the level of core inflation had been held down temporarily early this year as a result of increased price discounting by motor vehicle manufacturers and dealers and by a special provincial credit program for electricity customers in British Columbia.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI peaked at 3.9 per cent in May, boosted by a jump in natural gas prices (resulting from earlier tight supplies and the end of an Alberta government assistance program) and by a temporary surge in gasoline prices.
Since then, the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI has fallen sharply, moving down towards core inflation.
In September, the 12-month rise in the CPI was 2.6 per cent.
This marked decline in total CPI inflation towards the core rate reflects the partial reversal of previous energy-price increases.
The prices of both fuel oil and gasoline fell over this period, primarily as a result of reductions in crude oil prices.
As well, a buildup in natural gas inventories since early 2001 led to a large reduction in prices at the producer level, which contributed to an easing in the year-over-year rate of increase in natural gas prices at the consumer level since mid-year.
While recent declines in the prices of energy commodities are starting to contribute to a more moderate rate of increase in consumer energy prices, and therefore in the total CPI, the estimated pass-through of higher energy costs to the non-energy components of the total CPI is continuing - about 0.1 per cent over the past year.
To date, this effect has been most evident in airfares, local transportation costs, and the prices of fruits and vegetables.
Both core and total CPI inflation also appear to have been affected to some degree by the pass-through of increased costs for imported goods and services over the past year, partly resulting from the depreciation of the Canadian dollar during that period.
The prices of non-energy commodities have, on balance, decreased considerably since mid-April.
In the case of lumber, the imposition of a countervailing duty on exports of softwood lumber to the United States resulted in a surge in prices paid by US consumers, which has largely been reversed.
For exporters of lumber, the price, net of duty, has decreased.
The slowing in Canada's economic expansion since the third quarter of 2000, to a rate well below the economy's growth potential, largely reflects the marked easing in growth of demand in the US economy.
Economic activity in the United States slowed abruptly after mid-2000, with the four-quarter growth of real GDP falling from 5.2 per cent in the second quarter of 2000 to 1.2 per cent in the second quarter of 2001.
In Canada, four-quarter growth in real GDP decreased from 4.8 per cent in the second quarter of 2000 to 2.1 per cent in the second quarter of 2001.
Although economic growth in Canada was somewhat stronger than that in the United States over this period, the reduction in US growth had a substantial adverse effect on the pace of Canada's expansion, given the close trade linkages between the two countries.
The slowdown in the pace of US economic activity has continued well into the second half of 2001, with few concrete signs of a rebound.
The retrenchment in business investment, especially spending on high-technology equipment, has been particularly pronounced and more protracted than had been anticipated.
Economic growth in Canada in the third quarter of 2001 was also weaker than anticipated.
The unexpectedly sharp downturn in US capital expenditures and a significant easing in economic growth outside North America have been key negative factors for the Canadian economy.
As a result, Canadian shipments and manufacture of telecommunications products, computers, and other electronic equipment have declined considerably from the very high levels reached at the end of last year.
Moreover, despite production cutbacks, inventory levels in these particular manufacturing industries remained much higher than normal at mid-year, and as a result, further reductions are likely over the remainder of the year.
Canadian exports and production of automotive products, pulp and paper, and chemical products have also been adversely affected by the US economic slowdown.
Inventory imbalances in these last two industries will contribute to additional downward pressure on output over the near term.
The growth of household spending has been on a softening trend, reflecting the slowing in real income growth, recent job losses, and an associated decline in consumer confidence.
In addition, capital spending by Canadian firms has been edging down since the fourth quarter of 2000 in response to increasing excess production capacity, particularly in the telecommunications area.
The negative effects of the terrorist attacks have exacerbated these weakening trends in the Canadian economy.
Our best estimate is that the disruption of activity in various sectors in Canada, particularly finance and transportation, reduced the growth rate of Canadian real GDP in the third quarter of 2001 by about 1 percentage point.
Combined with an already weak picture, this suggests that growth in the third quarter was probably slightly negative and will likely be near zero in the fourth quarter.
Several measures indicate that pressures on production capacity eased significantly during the first three quarters of 2001.
The Bank's most recent estimates of its conventional measure of potential output and the output gap suggest that the Canadian economy began to operate below its production capacity in the third quarter of 2001.
The unemployment rate has risen somewhat since mid-2000, and the marked reduction in the help-wanted index over this period, together with the reduction in employment since May 2001, points to weaker labour demand as the source of the increase in unemployment.
The Bank's most recent survey of firms also suggests that capacity pressures and labour shortages have diminished appreciably since the beginning of the year.
This easing in pressures on product and labour markets has been broadly based across the country.
Despite this evidence, a number of other indicators suggest that conditions remained tight in certain product and labour markets in the first three quarters of this year.
Skilled workers, particularly in the energy and health-care sectors, remained in short supply.
Vacancy rates for industrial property were again very low in the third quarter of 2001, and office vacancy rates, while rising, were below average.
New, unoccupied housing units were also in very short supply.
Overall, the slowing in economic activity since the last quarter of 2000 has substantially reduced demand pressures.
On balance, the available evidence suggests that the economy was in excess supply in the third quarter.
Based on the average hourly earnings of permanent workers, the underlying rate of increase in average labour compensation appears to have moved down to about 2.75 per cent in the third quarter of 2001, from about 3.5 per cent in the second half of 2000.
The year-over-year rise in labour compensation in the business sector eased between the second quarter of 2000 and the second quarter of 2001.
Meanwhile, growth in labour productivity remained modest in the first half of 2001 because of the slowdown in economic growth.
With these rates of increase of compensation and productivity, the year-over-year increase in unit labour costs in the business sector was 2.3 per cent in the second quarter of 2001.
The Bank of Canada has lowered its target for the overnight rate by 300 basis points since the beginning of the year.
This includes five cuts totalling 200 basis points since the May Report (on 29 May, 17 July, 28 August, 17 September, and 23 October).
The first two cuts, of 25 basis points each, were made in the context of a gradual slowing in economic growth in Canada that resulted from declining US growth.
With the subsequent recognition that the slowdown in both external and domestic aggregate demand was likely to be deeper and more protracted than earlier anticipated, especially following the terrorist attacks of 11 September, the pace of interest rate reductions picked up.
The last three interest rate reductions - of 25, 50, and 75 basis points, respectively - brought the target for the overnight rate down to 2.75 per cent.
The objective of these actions was to buttress demand and to bolster business and household confidence, as economic prospects weakened and the outlook for the future rate of inflation eased.
All of the interest rate changes, except that of 17 September, were made on the pre-announced dates.
The 17 September action, between scheduled dates, was an extraordinary measure taken in the wake of the terrorist attacks in the United States.
It, like similar actions in other countries, was aimed at underpinning consumer and business confidence in the aftermath of the attacks.
The Bank of Canada also provided additional liquidity to the banking system immediately after the 11 September attacks to ensure the orderly functioning of financial markets.
In the United States, the Federal Reserve has lowered its target for the federal funds rate by 400 basis points in total since the beginning of the year, 250 basis points of which have been the result of actions taken since the completion of the May Report.
The latter included two recent 50-basis-point cuts, one announced on 17 September, subsequent to the terrorist attacks, and one on 2 October in recognition of the continued weak trends in the US economy.
With these moves, the federal funds target has been lowered to 2.5 per cent.
The more pessimistic economic outlook since midsummer has contributed to a downward shift and steepening in the yield curve in Canada and in the United States.
The view that the North American economic recovery was delayed generated expectations of more policy easing, which are embodied in short-term interest rates.
It may also have reduced the inflation component incorporated in long-term rates, since long-term bond yields have fallen in both Canada and the United States.
The positive interest rate differential between yields on Canadian and US government bonds decreased through the summer months amid growing signs that the economic slowdown would affect Canada more than the market had previously expected.
Since 11 September, however, the differential has widened again, as investor preference for US government securities in times of global uncertainty has led to lower yields on longer-term US Treasury bonds compared with the yields on the longer-term bonds of other countries.
In the spring and early summer, support for the Canadian dollar came in part from market expectations that the economic slowdown would be relatively less pronounced in Canada than in the United States.
More recently, the weaker state of the world economy and the resulting reduction in commodity prices, the deceleration in Canadian economic activity, and the global economic uncertainty caused by the terrorist attacks have contributed to weakness in the Canadian dollar.
In response to the events of 11 September, the US dollar initially weakened against major world currencies, continuing the depreciating trend that had begun in June.
However, as markets re-evaluated the relative cyclical positions of the world's major economies, the US dollar subsequently recovered beyond its pre-attack level.
Monetary conditions have eased considerably since the May Report - the combined result of interest rate declines and depreciation of the exchange rate.
The index reached -9.91 on 22 October, down from -8.0 in the last Report.
Since the May Report, credit conditions have tightened for businesses because of the deterioration in the economic outlook and the increase in uncertainty, particularly after the 11 September attacks.
In the bond market, this tightening has been reflected in the increase in spreads between the interest rates on corporate debt and those on government debt.
Moreover, whereas earlier in the year, only a few sectors, such as telecommunications and automotive manufacturing, had been affected, more industries are now feeling the effects of the tighter credit conditions.
In spite of this tightening, the growth of business credit has picked up since the May Report because of the increased demand for funds.
This increase is related to the desire of firms to hold additional liquidity in the context of heightened economic uncertainty.
Between late May and early September, the Toronto Stock Exchange experienced a sizable decline, falling by over 12 per cent.
This slide mirrored the downturn of the Dow Jones Industrial Average , which fell about 15 per cent over the same period.
Both of these stock markets fell more than 10 per cent in the 10 days following 11 September but subsequently recovered by a substantial amount.
Beyond their immediate tragic consequences, the terrorist attacks in the United States have introduced a great deal of uncertainty into the world economy.
Prior to the attacks, the slowdown in global economic growth had already become quite pronounced, as other industrialized and emerging-market economies increasingly began to show more clearly the effects of weaker growth in the United States and the global contraction in the telecommunications and information technology sectors.
This uncertainty is critical to the assessment of the economic outlook.
The performance of the global economy will depend importantly on geopolitical developments and on the effects that the attacks have on confidence.
Economic forecasts in this environment are subject to a much higher degree of uncertainty than usual.
Rather than presenting a conventional forecast in these circumstances, we will present the Bank's working assumptions and the economic scenario that they generate.
The Bank's first working assumption is that there will be no further major escalation of terrorism.
Against this background, consumer and business confidence can reasonably be expected to recover, although the timing and pace of this recovery are highly uncertain.
The Bank's second working assumption is that the lingering sense of insecurity will continue to weigh on consumer and business confidence in North America through the first half of next year, but that confidence will then stabilize and recover to normal levels in the second half of 2002.
In the United States, economic growth had come to a standstill during the first half of 2001.
Although some slowing to a more sustainable pace had been desirable, the slowdown was deeper and more prolonged than initially expected.
To an important extent, this deceleration reflected the sharp turnaround in the growth of investment spending (which had been a key element in the US expansion).
At the same time, consumer spending and housing expenditures continued to advance, albeit at a slower pace.
Deteriorating conditions in the US labour market during the summer, together with other indicators, suggested that the pickup in growth in the second half of the year would be more gradual than earlier expected.
Against an already weak outlook for the second half of 2001, the near-term disruptions created by the terrorist attacks have led the Bank to expect US economic growth to be negative in both the third and fourth quarters.
With growth in the first half of 2001 averaging only 1.2 per cent, this implies growth on an annual average basis for 2001 of only about 1 per cent (about 0 per cent for the four quarters to 2001Q4) - close to the consensus forecast.
When we look ahead to 2002, there are several factors, including significant declines in interest rates, that should help to underpin growth.
The US Federal Reserve moved quickly to reduce official interest rates in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks.
In addition, the stimulative fiscal measures introduced earlier this year, as well as increased government expenditures and proposed tax reductions following the attacks, will boost personal incomes and demand in the United States.
And, prior to 11 September, the inventory correction had progressed considerably and was nearing completion in some areas, such as the automotive sector.
With the assumption that confidence recovers to normal levels in the second half of 2002, the significant amount of monetary and fiscal stimulus that has been provided over the past year is expected to support a relatively strong rebound in economic activity.
Hence, following weak growth in the first half of 2002, growth in the second half is projected to move up above the growth rate of potential output (of about 3 per cent).
On an annual average basis, this scenario implies a growth rate in 2002 of just about 1 per cent, which is also close to the consensus forecast.
This weak annual growth rate is heavily influenced by the expected contraction in economic activity in the second half of 2001.
Indeed, on a fourth-quarter-over-fourth-quarter basis, growth in 2002 would be much stronger, at 2.7 per cent.
In that context, all major central banks have lowered interest rates to support demand.
In Europe, the spillover effects from the US slowdown in investment spending, along with the effects of weaker domestic demand, were already being increasingly felt prior to the attacks in September.
The technology sectors were experiencing a particularly severe adjustment.
In Japan, economic problems have continued unabated since the May Report, largely because efforts to revive the economy are constrained by underlying structural difficulties, including ongoing problems in the financial sector.
In view of recent developments, growth in the major European economies in 2001 is expected to slow to around 1.5 per cent on an average annual basis, while economic activity in Japan is expected to decline by about 0.5 per cent.
Growth prospects have also deteriorated further in the economies of emerging-market countries, although contagion from the financial difficulties in Argentina and Turkey has remained relatively limited.
In line with the global economic slowdown, the US-dollar price of non-energy commodities is projected to decline somewhat further over the next few months.
Thereafter, non-energy commodity prices are expected to recover gradually.
Crude oil prices are likely to be volatile but, on balance, they are expected to remain below US$25 per barrel in coming months.
Natural gas prices, having fallen considerably since early 2001, are likely to recover somewhat through the winter heating season.
In Canada, economic growth in the second half of 2001 is expected to be close to zero or slightly negative.
Canadian exports likely declined still further in the second half of 2001, primarily as a result of the expected reduction in US aggregate economic activity.
The growth of household expenditures in the second half of 2001 will no doubt be held back by recent and prospective job losses, the substantial reduction in equity prices, and the increased uncertainty resulting from the terrorist attacks.
In the current highly uncertain world economic and political climate, Canadian businesses are also expected to remain cautious.
Capital spending is likely to be substantially cut in those industries where a significant amount of excess capacity has emerged or where the medium-term outlook for demand has been revised down as a result of the terrorist attacks.
Further growth in energy investment over this period will also likely be tempered by the impact on cash flow of the recent sharp reduction in natural gas prices.
Since growth is expected to be close to zero or slightly negative in the second half of 2001, annual average growth for 2001 would be about 1.5 per cent.
This is down from the range of 2 to 3 per cent projected in both the May 2001 Report and the August Update.
The average private sector forecast is for growth in Canada's real GDP of 1.4 per cent for 2001 (Consensus Economics 2001).
At the time of the May Report, the consensus outlook called for growth of 2.4 per cent in 2001.
The performance of the Canadian economy in 2002 will depend critically on the global environment in general and on the timing and strength of the US recovery in particular.
The Bank's working assumption is that household and business confidence in the United States and Canada will recover to normal levels in the second half of next year in the absence of further major geopolitical shocks.
In this scenario, a second-half US recovery will increase demand for Canadian exports.
As confidence rebuilds, the considerable amount of monetary stimulus in place, together with recently announced increases in government spending and previously announced tax cuts, is expected to support strong growth in domestic spending.
Rebounds in domestic and foreign demand should support a recovery in business investment with a lag.
The Bank's survey of businesses carried out in September suggested, however, that investment spending would likely edge down over the next year, reflecting the high level of uncertainty regarding the outlook for sales.
In this scenario, growth is expected to remain relatively weak in the first half of 2002 - about 2 per cent at an annual rate - before rising to about 4 per cent in the second half of 2002 (above the estimated growth rate of potential output of about 3 per cent).
On an annual average basis, this implies growth for 2002 of about 1.5 per cent.
This is comparable to the average private sector forecast of 1.7 per cent growth for 2002, down from 3.3 per cent at the time of the May Report.
In the regular survey reported in the Conference Board of Canada's autumn Index of Business Confidence, 72 per cent of respondents expected prices, in general, to rise over the next 6 months at a rate of 2 per cent or less, and 96 per cent expected a rate of 3 per cent or less.
The latest survey of firms conducted by the Bank's regional offices also confirms that inflation expectations are firmly anchored inside the Bank's inflation-control target range.
The average private sector forecast for the rate of increase in the total CPI is 2.0 per cent in 2002 (slightly lower than last spring).
As well, the differential between 30-year conventional and Real Return bonds is close to 2 per cent.
Typical forecasts of longer-term inflation are 2.0 to 2.1 per cent, depending on the time horizon.
The pass-through of increased energy costs to the non-energy components of the CPI is likely to continue, although this effect is expected to be modest and to be spread over several years.
Assumptions about the prices of crude oil and natural gas will, however, continue to significantly affect the near-term outlook for consumer energy prices and therefore for the total CPI.
If crude oil prices remain below their early-September price of US$27 per barrel for the remainder of this year, gasoline and fuel oil prices will likely remain below year-earlier levels.
In addition, the 12-month rate of increase in natural gas prices at the consumer level is expected to ease further over the next 6 months.
The increase in costs arising from the depreciation of the Canadian dollar since the beginning of 2000 may continue to put some upward pressure on inflation over the next year and a half.
Earlier episodes of large changes in the exchange rate during the 1990s, characterized by low exchange rate pass-through to the CPI in Canada and in many other industrial countries, suggest that these effects should be limited.
With the recent easing in labour market pressures, wage gains are expected to slow through 2002.
Indeed, the Bank's latest survey of businesses shows that significantly fewer firms are expecting wage increases to rise than was the case at the end of 2000.
With stronger productivity gains anticipated after the start of the economic recovery, increases in overall unit labour costs should be moderate.
While remaining relatively high, the rates of growth of the three narrow money aggregates, M1, M1+, and M1++, have slowed significantly from the beginning of the year.
Much of the decline, particularly in the case of gross M1, was due to the decreasing importance of special factors such as an earlier jump in the deposits of financial institutions held at banks, which had boosted the growth of the narrow aggregates relative to that of underlying transactions balances.
Part of the reason why growth in the narrow aggregates remained relatively strong over the period has been increased demand for money for precautionary purposes.
In the face of heightened stock market uncertainty and concerns over future income, firms and individuals may be choosing to hold a higher level of liquid deposits for precautionary purposes.
Tighter credit conditions in some sectors may also increase the desire for higher levels of liquidity.
To the extent that these balances are used to purchase financial assets rather than goods and services once uncertainty is reduced, they are not an indication of immediate inflationary pressures.
In September, growth in narrow money increased sharply largely because of temporary factors associated with the terrorist attacks, which induced a large number of businesses and households to increase their liquidity and delay reinvestment of funds.
The forecast for real GDP growth in 2002, based on narrow money growth, is between 2 and 2.5 per cent.
And the Bank's model based on narrow money predicts that core inflation will fall to near the midpoint of the inflation-control target range over the next 6 months.
Growth in M2++ has also slowed since the beginning of the year, in line with falling contributions to mutual funds.
The growth rate of M2++ increased in September, due primarily to a sharp rise in narrow money and increased interest in money-market mutual funds.
Historical data for M2++ have been revised, owing to the adoption of a more reliable data source for contributions to mutual funds.
The new data result in a more moderate rate of growth in 2001 and early 2002 than was previously estimated.
M2++ is currently growing at a rate that is broadly consistent with inflation of around 2 per cent.
The Canadian economy is judged to have moved into excess supply in the third quarter of 2001.
In the scenario based on the Bank's working assumption, real output growth is not projected to exceed potential growth until the second half of 2002.
Therefore, excess supply continues to build through to mid-2002, putting downward pressure on core inflation over this period.
This influence is expected to be tempered by longer-term inflation expectations that remain close to 2 per cent and by current and projected increases in unit labour costs that are also in this range.
Under the working assumptions, the Bank would expect core inflation to move below 2 per cent in early 2002 and to fall to about 1 1/2 per cent in the second half of the year.
The degree of economic slack is expected to start shrinking in the second half of 2002 and to disappear through 2003.
Thus, by the end of 2003, core inflation should move back close to the 2 per cent midpoint of the target range.
If world energy prices remain at or below their early-September levels, the rate of increase in the total CPI is projected to fall to close to 2 per cent by the end of this year and to move below the midpoint of the target range in 2002.
Under this assumption for energy prices, total CPI inflation would be below core inflation in 2002.
Total CPI inflation is also expected to move back up towards the 2 per cent midpoint in late 2003.
During this past summer, evidence had begun to accumulate that the economic slowdown in North America would be deeper and last longer than had previously been expected.
In particular, the effects from the ongoing global retrenchment in the information and telecommunications sectors had become a much stronger force than was initially recognized.
The events of 11 September and their fallout around the world have added a further major element of weakness and uncertainty to the near-term prospects for the global economy and for Canada.
How quickly levels of activity recover and economic growth resumes will depend crucially on geopolitical developments and on how soon consumer and business confidence in the United States and Canada return to normal.
One can construct a scenario where confidence is restored quickly and, given the amount of monetary and fiscal stimulus that has been provided, robust growth resumes early in 2002.
On the other hand, consumer and business confidence in North America could stay weak for quite some time, in which case growth would remain sluggish through most of 2002.
In coming to its decision to further reduce the target for the overnight interest rate on 23 October, the Bank operated on the basis of the working assumptions presented in this Report.
These assumptions are that there will be no further major escalation of terrorism and that confidence will recover to normal levels in the second half of 2002.
Based on this analysis, the Bank now expects downward pressure on inflation to persist through much of next year, with core inflation falling to about 1 1/2 per cent in the second half of 2002.
The 75-basis-point cut in the Bank's key policy rate on 23 October, which, together with previous declines, has brought the target overnight rate down to 2.75 per cent, aims to support economic growth and keep inflation close to our 2 per cent target over the medium term.
While subject to an unusually wide band of uncertainty, the outlook presented in this Report will guide the Bank's judgment about the appropriate course for monetary policy as more information on the economy becomes available.
In the November Monetary Policy Report, the timing and extent of the recovery in economic activity in Canada this year was seen as depending crucially on geopolitical developments and on how quickly consumer and business confidence would return to normal.
Two polar scenarios were envisaged.
In one, consumer and business confidence stayed fragile through 2002, contributing to sluggish growth.
In the other, confidence was restored quickly, leading to robust growth early this year.
While robust growth is not yet underway, geopolitical developments have evolved positively, and consumer confidence has improved.
Thus, the likelihood that economic growth this year will be between these two scenarios, and broadly in line with the Bank's working assumptions of last November, has increased.
This implies that the economy should gain significant momentum as the year progresses.
However, business confidence remains weak in many countries, with the recovery in global business investment being the major area of uncertainty for the outlook.
Relative to its assumptions of last November, the Bank now expects the amount of economic slack in 2002 to be somewhat greater.
After declining by 0.8 per cent at an annual rate in the third quarter of 2001, Canada's real GDP is estimated to have remained largely unchanged in the fourth quarter.
This would result in annual average growth for 2001 of about 1.5 per cent.
Some sectors of the economy have recovered quickly from the disruptions associated with the terrorist attacks on the United States last September.
But in other areas, the adverse effects have persisted.
In particular, activity in air travel, tourism, and certain manufacturing operations has remained well below that prior to the attacks.
Automobile sales were at record levels in December, but some of these sales appear to have been brought forward from the first quarter of this year.
On balance, these sectoral developments suggest that, on average over the fourth and first quarters, the economy will have expanded by slightly less than was expected in the November Report, creating a correspondingly larger output gap.
The 12-month rate of increase in the core CPI was 1.7 per cent in November, down from 2.3 per cent in September.
This decline in core inflation, while consistent with an economy that has moved into a position of excess supply, occurred sooner than expected in the last Report.
This lower-than-expected level of core inflation mainly reflected increased price discounting by motor vehicle manufacturers and dealers, as well as by operators of travel accommodation, to stimulate sales following the sharp fall-off in September.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was 0.7 per cent in November, down sharply from 2.6 per cent in September.
This marked decrease relative to the core rate stems mainly from the significant decline in the world prices of energy commodities over the past year.
In response to weaker domestic activity, rising levels of economic slack, and attendant downward pressures on inflation, the Bank lowered its target for the overnight rate by 50 basis points on 27 November 2001 and by 25 basis points on 15 January, bringing the level down to 2 per cent.
Since the beginning of 2001, the Bank's key policy rate has been reduced by a total of 375 basis points.
More than half of this reduction has occurred since late August.
Over the two months up to 15 January (the last fixed announcement date), the Canadian dollar fluctuated around a relatively low level against its US counterpart.
This situation reflected the general cyclical weakness of the world economy and commodity prices, as well as the uncertain international economic and political situation.
The Canadian dollar strengthened somewhat against other major currencies over this period.
Because of the weakness in economic growth and the uncertainty surrounding the outlook, certain sectors of the Canadian economy have experienced somewhat tighter credit conditions.
There has recently been some easing in these conditions, however.
As well, equity markets have recovered from the lows that followed the terrorist attacks.
Recent geopolitical and economic developments increasingly point to the likelihood that economic growth in North America will gather significant momentum over the course of the year.
The geopolitical situation has improved, and there are indications of a recovery in consumer confidence in both the United States and Canada from the low points reached after the terrorist attacks.
However, business confidence in both countries remains weak, primarily reflecting the fact that the adjustment in inventories and fixed investment has not yet fully run its course and that corporate profits are low.
The timing and strength of the recovery in global business investment represents the major uncertainty for the outlook.
Growth in the US economy is projected to be modest in the first half of 2002.
Business investment is expected to remain sluggish through the period, while the phasing out of generous price incentives on motor vehicles, a high level of consumer indebtedness, and rising unemployment are likely to slow the rate of increase in household spending.
Lower energy prices will, however, be a positive factor for households.
In the second half of the year, business confidence is assumed to recover as the inventory correction ends and the significant amount of fiscal and monetary stimulus continues to support household spending.
Investment spending should begin to pick up as corporate earnings start to recover.
These developments should lead to a strong rebound in the US economy in the second half of the year - to growth rates above that of potential output.
On an annual average basis, this would imply a growth rate for US real GDP of around 3/4 per cent in 2002, slightly below the rate expected in the Bank's last Report.
Nevertheless, with the pace of activity firming over the course of the year, US growth is expected to be close to 2 1/4 per cent on a fourth-quarter-over-fourth-quarter basis.
Prospects for economic growth in other industrialized countries have weakened since the release of the November Report.
In Europe, the spillover effects to domestic demand from geopolitical uncertainties and the US slowdown have apparently dampened economic growth by more than had been anticipated.
Nevertheless, economic activity is expected to strengthen somewhat during the second half of the year in response to the earlier easing in monetary policy, lower energy prices, and the projected US recovery.
The economic outlook in Japan has also worsened, owing to ongoing structural difficulties and deteriorating business and household confidence.
Activity in emerging-market economies is generally expected to recover through 2002 as global demand picks up.
The Argentine default has had little impact on other emerging-market borrowers.
The projected recovery in world economic growth should gradually boost the US-dollar prices of non-energy commodities through 2002 from their current low levels.
Prices for both crude oil and natural gas are also likely to recover somewhat over this period.
In Canada, economic growth in the first half of 2002 is also projected to be modest and slightly lower than was previously projected on the basis of the Bank's working assumptions.
Although household spending is expected to increase moderately, business investment and export growth are likely to remain weak.
Cash-flow effects from lower energy prices will be one factor constraining capital spending in Canada.
Growth of real GDP, on an annualized basis, is now expected to average between 1 and 2 per cent in the first half of this year.
Demand for Canadian exports should increase significantly in the second half of the year as a result of the strengthening of the US economy.
As well, the substantial amount of monetary stimulus that has been provided, together with the impact of recent government measures to improve national security and further reduce tax rates, will continue to support growth in domestic spending.
These conditions should lead to a restoration of business confidence and to the start of a recovery in business investment.
Thus, the pace of economic activity in Canada is still expected to be above potential growth in the second half of the year - in the range of 3 to 4 per cent.
On an annual average basis, GDP growth for 2002 would be in a range around a midpoint of slightly above 1 per cent - broadly in line with the latest average private sector forecast.
This growth profile means that the amount of economic slack through 2002 would be somewhat greater than was anticipated at the time of the last Report.
Since last autumn, financial markets have remained volatile, reflecting uncertainty regarding the international economic and geopolitical outlook.
Nevertheless, expectations for future economic prospects have become more optimistic.
In equity markets, the recovery from the effects of 11 September points to expectations of an economic recovery and of higher earnings.
The more positive economic outlook among financial market participants is also reflected in the current steepness of the yield curve in bond markets.
Although the November level of core inflation was somewhat lower than expected as a result of increased price discounting, most of this discounting is expected to diminish appreciably in coming months, in line with the recovery in consumer confidence.
Nonetheless, core inflation will likely remain around its current level in the first half of the year, given the increased excess supply in the economy.
With slightly greater economic slack through 2002, core inflation is now expected to average just under 1 1/2 per cent in the second half.
Total CPI inflation should remain below the core rate until late 2002, on the assumption that world energy prices increase only moderately from current levels.
By lowering its target for the overnight interest rate by 375 basis points since the beginning of 2001, the Bank has taken vigorous action to support growth in domestic demand.
As a result, economic slack should start to diminish in the second half of 2002 and would be expected to disappear by late 2003.
Consequently, both core and total CPI inflation should be back close to 2 per cent in about two years.
At the time of last November's Monetary Policy Report, two issues dominated the analysis: the global economic slowdown and the fallout from the September terrorist attacks.
The Bank's January 2002 Update described geopolitical developments as having evolved positively and consumer confidence as having improved.
The most likely outlook projected for the Canadian economy in the Update was modest growth in the first half of the year, followed by a significant pickup in the pace of activity as the year progressed.
The downside risk of sluggish growth persisting throughout 2002 was countered on the upside by the possibility of robust growth early in the year if confidence levels were restored quickly.
Recent information indicates that the recovery in the Canadian economy began sooner and has been considerably stronger than anticipated in January.
With confidence returning quickly, stimulus from both monetary and fiscal policy has led to strong growth in consumption expenditures and new residential construction.
The growth in final sales in the fourth quarter of last year was met largely out of inventories, a situation that is underpinning production in early 2002.
With stronger aggregate demand growth in the fourth quarter of last year and in the first quarter of 2002, levels of activity are higher than anticipated, implying that the economy is operating with less excess supply than was previously expected.
Core inflation in early 2002 is also somewhat above our earlier projections.
While a strong economic recovery appears underway, there are still uncertainties in the outlook, most notably how quickly and strongly business fixed investment will rebound, and how political developments in the Middle East may affect crude oil prices and the global economy.
The challenge for monetary policy over the remainder of this year and through 2003 is to help the economy move back to, and then sustain, levels of production at capacity by taking actions aimed at achieving the Bank's 2 per cent target for inflation control.
This means reducing, in a timely and measured manner, the substantial amount of monetary stimulus now in place.
Since last autumn, core CPI inflation has, on average, been close to the 2 per cent target midpoint of the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range.
The rate of increase in the total CPI has fallen sharply to below 2 per cent, reflecting the marked declines in world energy prices over the past year.
Core inflation, which had hovered around 2.3 per cent from the spring to the autumn of 2001, decreased to around 1.7 per cent, on average, over the November-January period, before rising back to 2.2 per cent in February.
Other measures of the trend rate of inflation were lower than or equal to the core rate.
The February level of core inflation, at 2.2 per cent, was somewhat higher than expected.
Part of this surprise reflected a change in the timing of certain seasonal price increases (for such items as clothing and footwear and certain travel-related services) and is therefore expected to reverse soon.
Another factor was the effect on food prices of the depreciation of the Canadian dollar over the past two years.
With the economy still estimated to be in a position of modest excess supply, core inflation is expected to decline in coming months to just below 2 per cent.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was 1.5 per cent in February, down markedly from 2.6 per cent in September.
This drop stemmed mainly from the sizable decline in the prices of oil and natural gas from the high levels of a year ago.
The prices of non-energy commodities, after declining markedly in the second half of 2001 because of weaker global demand, have begun to pick up.
Buoyant demand contributed to substantial gains in lumber and cattle prices, while production cutbacks and indications of recovering world demand have led to improved prices for base metals.
During the last quarter of 2001 and the first quarter of 2002, Canada's economy expanded at a considerably brisker pace than was projected in the November Report.
As a result, the Bank's current estimate of the output gap in the first quarter of 2002 is smaller than had been anticipated.
Following a contraction in the third quarter, US economic activity picked up in the final quarter of 2001.
Towards year-end, US household spending strengthened significantly in response to low interest rates, strong financial incentives on motor vehicle purchases, and a recovery in consumer confidence.
At the same time, government spending grew robustly, supported by an acceleration in the pace of military spending.
These developments were partly offset by a further decline in business investment and by firms continuing to liquidate inventories rapidly.
Canada's real GDP, after falling slightly in the third quarter, grew at a 2 per cent annualized rate in the fourth quarter of 2001 - in marked contrast to the projection of no change at the time of the last Report and in the January 2002 Update.
The substantial amount of monetary stimulus that has been provided and recent government measures to improve national security have contributed to a restoration of consumer confidence and a strong increase in household spending on goods and services and on new housing since last September's tragic events.
Marked gains in real incomes, partly reflecting earlier tax cuts, as well as special financing incentives for motor vehicle purchases, have also boosted household spending.
Moreover, the significant inventory correction in the fourth quarter and the recent resumption of growth in export volumes as a result of renewed economic expansion in the United States point to a recovery that is well underway.
Together with strong employment gains in the first quarter of 2002, this suggests that Canadian real GDP growth in the first quarter will be about 4 1/2 per cent, much stronger than anticipated at the time of the January Update.
Most indicators confirm that the Canadian economy moved into a position of excess supply during 2001.
The marked slowdown in real GDP growth last year was reflected in a rise in the unemployment rate as well as in a substantial drop in the length of the work week.
Statistics Canada's measured rate of capacity utilization in the non-farm, goods-producing sector in the fourth quarter of 2001 was well below normal levels.
This lack of pressure on capacity, including pressure from labour shortages, was also confirmed by the Bank's most recent survey of firms.
The Bank's current estimate of its conventional measures of potential output and the output gap suggests that the amount of economic slack increased in the fourth quarter of 2001 to about 1 per cent of potential output.
It is the Bank's judgment, after considering all the indicators, that the economy was in a position of somewhat greater excess supply than the conventional estimate would suggest.
In the first quarter of 2002, with economic growth now estimated to be above the economy's potential growth rate, the amount of slack diminished somewhat.
This contrasts with earlier projections of a further increase in excess supply in the first half of 2002.
The underlying rate of increase in average labour compensation has been in the 3.5 to 4 per cent range recently, based on both the average hourly earnings of permanent workers and labour compensation per person-hour in the business sector.
On a year-over-year basis, labour-productivity growth in the business sector increased to 2 per cent in the final quarter of 2001, as hours worked adjusted markedly to the slowdown in economic growth.
As a result, the year-over-year increase in unit labour costs in the business sector was 2 per cent at the end of 2001.
Year-over-year growth in labour productivity is expected to remain near 2 per cent in the first quarter of 2002.
The Bank of Canada reduced the target for the overnight rate by 50 basis points on 27 November 2001 and by 25 basis points on 15 January 2002, bringing the cumulative reduction since January 2001 to 375 basis points.
These policy actions came in response to weak current and expected domestic activity and the consequent downward pressures on future inflation.
On 5 March, the Bank held the target for the overnight rate at 2.0 per cent, a decision consistent with the release of data indicating that economic conditions in Canada were improving.
On 16 April, the Bank raised the target to 2.25 per cent, modestly reducing the amount of monetary stimulus in the economy, in the light of information that a robust recovery appears to be underway.
In the United States, the Federal Reserve lowered its target for the federal funds rate by 50 basis points on 6 November 2001 and by 25 basis points on 11 December 2001, bringing the total reduction since January 2001 to 475 basis points.
On 30 January 2002 and 19 March, the Federal Reserve decided to leave the target rate unchanged at 1.75 per cent.
At its 19 March meeting, the Fed also altered its assessment of the risks to the outlook, stating that they were now balanced with respect to the prospects of price stability and sustainable economic growth.
Yield curves in Canada and the United States have shifted upwards compared with last October.
Since the long-term rate reflects the average of expected future short-term rates, the current slope of the yield curve, with the short-term rate well below the long-term rate, also incorporates an expectation of rising short-term rates.
Shifts in the slope of the yield curve since 1999 have largely reflected the upward and downward movements in short-term rates, since long-term rates have been much more stable than in the past, largely owing to well-anchored inflation expectations.
On a trade-weighted basis, the Canadian dollar is broadly unchanged since last November.
Through late December and January, the Canadian dollar depreciated against the US dollar, and it has been relatively stable since then.
It has appreciated against other currencies over the period.
Since November 2001, the Bank's monetary conditions index has fluctuated in a range between -11.38 and -10.30.
Other financial developments are consistent with signs of economic recovery.
Overall, business-credit conditions have become more favourable since last autumn despite some adverse financial developments, including high-profile corporate bankruptcies in North America.
In the bond market, this improvement has been reflected in a decline in the spreads between interest rates on corporate bonds and those on government bonds from their peaks in November.
Conditions in Canadian markets for commercial paper remain relatively stable, while banks have become somewhat more cautious since last November in their lending practices with riskier borrowers.
The Toronto Stock Exchange, which posted a sizable decline after 11 September, is now about 20 per cent higher than the trough recorded last September.
These gains reflect less uncertainty and brighter expectations for the economy among investors.
Growth of business credit has slowed further since the last Report, with short-term business credit, especially bank loans, down over the period.
Bonds and, to a lesser extent, equities have been the main sources of new business financing.
Slow growth in business borrowing is consistent with reduced financing needs for inventory and other business investment, as well as with firms paying down their short-term debts.
It is also consistent with tighter conditions on bank lending, as would be expected at this point in the business cycle.
In contrast, growth in household credit has been robust and higher than growth in personal disposable income.
This reflects the strength in household spending, most notably on housing and consumer durables.
As a result, continued borrowing has led to a further rise in the ratio of household debt to personal income, although at a slower pace than in the past.
Furthermore, this rise has been largely matched by increases in assets, and with the current low level of interest rates, the share of personal income allotted to debt service is well below historical averages.
In the United States, economic conditions are improving at a significantly faster pace than was expected in the November Report.
Several developments suggest that a recovery is underway.
Spending on information technology has stabilized after about a year of decline, and production is recovering, aided by the near completion of the inventory correction.
Overall, consumption spending and housing investment have been robust, supported by significant amounts of fiscal and monetary stimulus.
US real GDP growth in the first half of this year is thus expected to average about 4 per cent, which is significantly stronger than projected in the November Report.
Given the strength in consumption, housing, and inventory investment early in the year, GDP growth in the second half of 2002 is likely to slow to about 3.25 per cent.
On an annual average basis in 2002, US economic growth would thus be about 2.5 per cent, compared with the projection of 1 per cent in the November Report.
In 2003, economic growth is expected to average about 3.5 per cent.
Prospects for economic expansion have also strengthened in other industrialized countries.
In Europe, production indicators point to a turnaround in economic activity, supported by the earlier easing in monetary conditions and the strengthening US economy.
Growth in the major European economies is expected to be close to 1 1/4 per cent on an average annual basis in 2002, and to rise to about 3 per cent in 2003, as activity gathers momentum.
In Japan, ongoing structural difficulties could lead to a further economic contraction in 2002 of about 1 1/2 per cent.
However, economic activity in Japan could pick up modestly by about 1 per cent in 2003, aided by the US recovery and easier monetary conditions.
Growth prospects for emerging-market economies should improve as global demand picks up.
Indeed, a recovery appears to have already started in the Southeast Asian countries.
In addition, the impact of the Argentine default on other emerging-market economies has been limited.
The projected recovery in world economic growth should contribute to substantial increases in the US-dollar price of non-energy commodities through the next two years.
This strengthening demand is expected to underpin the prices of crude oil and natural gas over the remainder of this year.
Additional uncertainty about the path of energy prices over the near term has resulted from recent political developments in the Middle East.
In Canada, economic growth in the first half of 2002 is expected to average between 3.5 and 4.5 per cent on an annualized basis, markedly higher than was projected in the last Report and the last Update.
Growth in household expenditures, especially on housing and related durable goods such as furniture and appliances, will continue to contribute to economic expansion.
A slowing in the pace of inventory liquidation should also support real GDP growth over this period.
Reductions in business investment in the first half are also likely to be smaller than in the last quarter of 2001, given that the amount of excess capacity is projected to decrease.
With further strong expansion of the US economy projected for the second half of 2002 and through 2003, robust growth in the demand for Canadian exports should continue.
As well, the combination of the earlier easing in domestic monetary conditions and past initiatives to cut taxes and enhance national security should continue to support household spending.
Capital expenditures in the oil and gas sector should also start to recover, owing to the recent pickup in the prices of oil and natural gas.
Real GDP in the second half of 2002 is projected to grow between 3 and 4 per cent, above the economy's growth potential of about 3 per cent.
This would produce annual average growth for 2002 of 2.25 to 3.25 per cent, almost 2 percentage points higher than projected in January.
For 2003, growth on an annual average basis is expected to be between 3 and 4 per cent.
Indeed, the Bank's outlook for growth through 2002 and 2003, combined with the unexpected strength of real GDP at the end of last year, implies that the amount of economic slack should be absorbed faster than was anticipated at the time of the last Report.
The amount of excess supply is therefore expected to decrease through 2002 and to be eliminated in the second half of 2003.
In the regular survey reported in the Conference Board of Canada's spring Index of Business Confidence, 30 per cent of respondents expected prices, in general, to rise over the next six months at an annual rate of 1 per cent or less, and 87 per cent expected a rate of 2 per cent or less.
Indeed, the average private sector forecast for the rate of increase in the total CPI is now 1.4 per cent in 2002 (markedly lower than last autumn).
In both cases, short-term expectations for the rise in the total CPI are being influenced by recent reductions in energy prices at the consumer level.
Inflation expectations over a two-year horizon, however, continue to be firmly anchored well inside the Bank's inflation-control target range.
This has been confirmed by the latest survey of firms conducted by the Bank's regional offices and by the average private sector forecast for total CPI inflation for 2003 (currently at 2.0 per cent).
Typical forecasts of longer-term inflation are also clustered around 2 per cent.
As well, the differential between 30-year conventional and Real Return bonds is now just above 2 per cent.
In addition to the factors discussed above, higher import costs arising from the depreciation of the Canadian dollar over the past two years may continue to put some modest upward pressure on prices through 2003.
The effects of higher insurance and other security costs following the 11 September terrorist attacks may be another source of modest upward pressure on prices over the next two years.
Given current and anticipated conditions in labour markets, wage gains are expected to hold relatively steady over the next two years.
The Bank's latest survey of firms is consistent with this outlook.
With productivity growth expected to remain around 2 per cent, growth in unit labour costs should be little changed through 2003.
The growth rates of the three narrow money aggregates, M1, M1+, and M1++, have trended up since the November Report, but eased off somewhat in February.
This increase has been relatively widespread across households, businesses, and account types.
Strong money growth over this period is largely due to the easing in monetary conditions.
Low rates of return on other assets, such as term deposits and GICs, have reduced the opportunity cost of holding liquid balances and have therefore contributed to very strong growth in the narrow money aggregates.
Also contributing to strong year-over-year growth rates in narrow money are the high precautionary balances accumulated last autumn in the face of uncertainty about future income and stock market returns.
With uncertainty diminishing, there are early signs that businesses and, to a lesser extent, households have begun to unwind these balances.
To the extent that they are used in the future to purchase financial assets rather than goods and services, they are not an indication of immediate inflation pressure.
The difficulties of distinguishing between the effects of lower interest rates and an increased appetite for liquidity have significantly increased the uncertainty surrounding forecasts of output and inflation based on the narrow money aggregates.
As uncertainty dissipates and rates of return on other assets recover, growth of the narrow money aggregates will likely decline further.
The possibility that more of the liquid balances than expected will be spent on goods and services, rather than reinvested in savings instruments, represents an upside risk to inflation.
Growth in M2++ has been much slower and more stable than growth in the narrow aggregates since the last Report.
This is consistent with the portfolio shifts mentioned earlier, since the strong growth that was seen in the transactions components of M2++ has been offset by declines in savings instruments such as term deposits and Canada Savings Bonds.
Broad money is currently growing at a rate that is roughly consistent with inflation of 2 per cent.
With the economy expected to remain in a position of modest excess supply through 2002, some downward pressure on core inflation should persist over the remainder of the year.
Several factors will likely limit this influence, however.
First, longer-term inflation expectations are still very close to 2 per cent.
Second, current and projected increases in unit labour costs are also in this range.
Finally, higher import costs arising from the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar may put some further temporary upward pressure on inflation.
With less economic slack than was expected in the last Report, the core rate is now projected to average just under 2 per cent in the second half of this year and the first half of 2003, before moving back to 2 per cent by about the end of 2003.
This would be consistent with the economy projected to be back to potential output in the second half of 2003.
If crude oil prices continue to average between US$22 and US$26 per barrel, total consumer price inflation should stay below the core rate through mid-year.
The Bank is projecting that total inflation, like core inflation, will be at 2 per cent by about the end of 2003.
For Canada, the outlook presented in this Report shows the economy moving back to potential output in the second half of 2003, with inflation at the Bank's 2 per cent target by the end of 2003.
Given the amount of monetary and fiscal stimulus that has been provided, growth could be stronger than projected.
It is also possible that the growth of household spending may not be as strong as anticipated, to the extent that even more of the recent strength in spending than assumed was, in fact, borrowed from future expenditures.
There is continuing uncertainty regarding the timing and strength of the pickup in business investment and exports, mainly because of the fragility of global business confidence.
And political developments in the Middle East may continue to affect crude oil prices, with possible repercussions for the global economy.
Given these factors, the task for monetary policy will be to gauge the strength of the economy as it approaches its capacity to produce, and the implications for future inflation.
This means reducing the amount of monetary stimulus in a timely and measured manner in order to keep inflation close to its 2 per cent target, thereby helping to sustain economic growth at full capacity over the medium term.
At the time of the April Monetary Policy Report, it was evident that a robust economic recovery was underway in Canada.
The Bank therefore began to reduce the substantial amount of monetary stimulus in the economy.
In the past three months, the Canadian economy has continued to register strong growth.
Spending on housing and consumer durables has been much stronger than expected.
Business fixed investment no longer appears to be acting as a drag on growth, with signs of recovery in investment in machinery and equipment emerging.
Among Canada's major trading partners, economic growth has been broadly in line with expectations.
Overall, in the first half of the year, the Canadian economy grew at a faster pace than anticipated.
As a result, it has moved towards full production capacity more quickly than was expected in April.
In addition, core inflation has been running slightly higher than projected.
In light of these developments, the Bank has continued to reduce the amount of monetary stimulus in the economy by raising its target for the overnight interest rate by 25 basis points on 4 June and again on 16 July.
As we look forward, given the limited amount of excess capacity in the economy and the lags involved for the effects of interest rate changes to work through the economy, the Bank must remain focused on taking the necessary actions to achieve the 2 per cent target for inflation control.
With monetary policy still very accommodative, economic growth in Canada could well turn out to be stronger than the Bank's revised projection presented in this Update.
At the same time, there are downside risks and uncertainties regarding the outlook.
Most recently, global corporate and financial market developments have been adversely affecting investor confidence, resulting in rising risk premiums and falling equity prices.
The near-term strength of final sales growth in the US economy thus remains uncertain.
Conditions in Latin America have deteriorated somewhat, and the geopolitical situation remains unsettled.
Canada's economic recovery, which began in the last quarter of 2001, gathered momentum in the first half of this year.
Real GDP surged by 6 per cent at an annual rate in the first quarter of 2002 and is likely to have risen by about 4.5 per cent in the second quarter.
The significant easing of monetary policy during 2001 was a key factor behind the strong growth of household demand in the first half of this year.
Canada's exports also rose considerably, as the US economy began to recover.
At the same time, the levels of both inventories and capital spending were stronger than anticipated.
Together, these developments suggest a broadening of the recovery across sectors.
The economy is now operating with less excess supply than was projected in the last Report.
Current estimates of the Bank's conventional measure of potential output and the output gap indicate that economic slack largely disappeared in the first half of 2002.
Other indicators, however, point to less pressure on capacity.
For example, recent marked increases in employment have been accompanied by higher labour supply, given the greater-than-expected rise in the labour force participation rate.
As well, information gathered by the Bank's regional offices does not suggest widespread capacity pressures.
On balance, it is the Bank's judgment that the economy was operating at mid-year with somewhat more slack than the conventional measure of the output gap would suggest.
Core inflation was 2.2 per cent in May, slightly above the level projected in the April Report.
Strong demand for housing and furnishings is putting upward pressure on the prices of both shelter and household durables.
A large upward adjustment in the premiums for auto and home insurance has also kept the core rate up in recent months.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was 1.0 per cent in May, down from 1.5 per cent in February.
This reduction relative to the core rate chiefly reflected a substantial decrease in the consumer price for natural gas, itself a lagged response to last year's sharp decline in prices at the producer level.
Since early in the year, financial markets have reflected a divergent outlook for the Canadian and US economies and for the expected policy responses.
Canadian money market instruments have tended to price in expectations of policy rate increases in Canada, whereas in US markets, participants have pushed out their timeline for the first tightening by the Federal Reserve.
This has been reflected in the Canada-US spread on 2-year instruments, which has widened significantly.
Since the April Report, the Canadian dollar has appreciated against the US dollar.
While reflecting strong Canadian economic data and wider interest rate spreads, this movement has also been part of a general weakening trend of the US dollar against all major currencies.
Concerns about US corporate profitability and accounting practices, together with the large US current account deficit, have contributed to weakness in the US dollar.
Against major currencies other than the US dollar, the Canadian dollar has weakened.
Following a robust first quarter, US economic activity is estimated to have slowed to around 2.5 per cent in the second quarter of this year, owing to slower growth in household spending and less support from inventory investment.
In the second half of the year, supported by ongoing stimulative policies, US economic growth should pick up.
In particular, capital spending is projected to start to strengthen, and demand by households should be sustained.
On an average annual basis, US real GDP is expected to grow by about 2.75 per cent this year.
In 2003, economic growth is projected to average about 3.75 per cent.
The downside risks to this outlook stem largely from recent corporate and financial market developments and their possible effects on corporate and household sector confidence and balance sheets.
In Japan, the contraction this year in economic activity is expected to be less pronounced than was anticipated in the April Report, owing partly to the somewhat faster recovery of exports.
In Europe, real GDP growth is now projected to be slightly below earlier expectations because of persistent weakness in domestic demand.
Growth prospects for a number of emerging-market economies are expected to continue to improve, particularly in Southeast Asia.
The situation in Latin America has worsened, however, as reflected in the recent sharp widening of interest rate spreads.
Over the next two years, the prices of non-energy commodities are projected to strengthen somewhat as the global economic expansion proceeds.
Although energy prices are not expected to change significantly over the remainder of 2002, Middle East tensions continue to make these projections particularly uncertain.
For Canada, the Bank projects continued solid growth in aggregate demand and output.
Spending by households should remain strong, although outlays on housing and related items will likely ease back from recent high levels towards the end of the forecast horizon.
With the economy operating close to capacity, investment spending on machinery and equipment should contribute positively to growth in aggregate demand.
As well, capital expenditures in the energy sector should increase, given expected prices for oil and gas.
And foreign demand for Canadian products is projected to continue to expand.
At the same time, selected sectors, such as telecommunications, continue to experience financial difficulty and, more recently, there have been growing concerns emanating largely from developments abroad about business accounting practices and the interpretation of corporate financial statements.
This has led to falling investor confidence and, in turn, to rising risk premiums on corporate bonds and weakness in equity markets in Canada.
As we go forward, it is the Bank's view that the underlying economic situation will require further reductions in the amount of monetary stimulus.
The timing and pace of policy adjustments will depend on the strength of the various factors at play and the implication for pressures on capacity and on inflation.
Over the period to the end of 2003, the Bank projects that the rate of economic expansion in Canada will be in the range of 3 to 4 per cent.
Given the current accommodative stance of policy, real GDP growth could be in the upper part of this range in the second half of this year.
Further out, in the second half of 2003, growth could be in the lower part, as growth of household spending slows from current unsustainably high rates and as imports pick up.
Such a profile would result in real GDP growth, on an annual average basis, of close to 3.5 per cent in both 2002 and 2003 - similar to the latest private sector consensus forecast.
This growth profile would return the Canadian economy to full production capacity in early 2003 - sooner than was expected in April.
There are both upside and downside risks to this projection.
On the positive side, growth over the period could turn out to be stronger because of the amount of monetary stimulus still in place.
On the negative side, there are the uncertainties associated with the recent global corporate and financial market developments and their potential effects on confidence and world economic growth.
With the economy projected to be in a position of balance between aggregate demand and supply starting early next year, and given underlying inflation expectations, core inflation is expected to steady out at close to 2 per cent by mid-2003.
Until then, core inflation is expected to remain slightly above 2 per cent and even edge up somewhat in the fourth quarter of this year from its May level.
This profile is based on several factors.
The effects of the recent large increases in insurance premiums and of the earlier depreciation of the Canadian dollar will persist for some time before diminishing in 2003.
Changes in the amount of price discounting are also playing a major role.
Intense price discounting in the fourth quarter of last year temporarily lowered core inflation.
With the strong recovery, the amount of price discounting has diminished significantly.
This reversal is expected to show up as a temporary increase in the 12-month rate of growth of core inflation in the fourth quarter of this year.
Higher energy prices and increases in tobacco taxes are expected to push total CPI inflation up close to the core rate over the next two months.
Through the second half of this year, the total and core rates are expected to be broadly in line.
For 2003, total CPI inflation, like core inflation, is projected to level out near 2 per cent.
Over the past year, Canada's economy has outperformed the economies of virtually all the other major industrial countries.
Core inflation has averaged somewhat higher than the Bank of Canada's 2 per cent target.
In these circumstances, monetary policy has been directed towards reducing the substantial amount of monetary stimulus in a timely and measured way.
While our domestic economy has enjoyed strong growth, the global economic recovery has been proceeding at a slower pace than anticipated.
Since the last Monetary Policy Report, economic, financial, and geopolitical developments have contributed to a more moderate and less certain outlook for global economic growth.
These developments include further adjustments in response to past excesses in capital spending, declines in equity prices, rising risk premiums, concerns about corporate governance and financial reporting, geopolitical developments in the Middle East, and concerns about the situation in several Latin American countries.
Spending by corporations and households within Canada could also be affected through increases in the cost of capital, declines in wealth as a result of falling equity prices, and tighter credit conditions.
Concerns about corporate governance and an unsettled geopolitical situation also increase uncertainty, which could cause households and corporations to postpone spending until a clearer picture emerges.
This Report presents a detailed assessment of the global and domestic factors that are shaping the outlook for the Canadian economy through 2003.
As well, it discusses the factors that are expected to push core inflation higher over the coming few months.
It remains the Bank's view that the underlying economic situation will require further reductions in the amount of monetary stimulus.
The timing and extent of policy adjustments will depend on the Bank's ongoing assessment of global and domestic developments and their implications for pressures on capacity and inflation in the Canadian economy.
Since February 2002, core CPI inflation has been above the 2 per cent target midpoint of the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range.
The rate of increase in the total CPI has moved up markedly to just above the core rate, reflecting the effects of a sharp increase in tobacco taxes and a marked rebound in crude oil prices.
Core CPI inflation has been running above the level expected in the April Report.
Between February and July, core inflation was steady at around 2.2 per cent.
Other measures of the trend rate of inflation have been lower than the core rate, but in August they were all above the 2 per cent target midpoint.
The higher-than-expected level of core inflation largely reflects unusual increases in both insurance premiums and electricity prices.
Premiums for home and, particularly, auto insurance have increased substantially, largely in response to an increase in the value of claims as well as recent low returns on portfolio investments by the insurance industry.
Together, increases in home and automobile insurance costs contributed 0.7 percentage points to core inflation in August.
As well, there was a recent weather-related jump in electricity prices in Ontario, which is expected to be largely reversed in coming months.
Core inflation has also been affected by strong demand for housing and furnishings, which has put upward pressure on the prices of these items.
In addition, past increases in import costs arising from the depreciation of the Canadian dollar since early 2000 continued to put some upward pressure on prices.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was 2.6 per cent in August, up markedly from 1.5 per cent in February.
Total CPI inflation moved up earlier than had been expected at the time of the April Report, although the convergence of core and total CPI inflation had been foreseen.
Crude oil prices rebounded sharply earlier this year, mainly reflecting fears of supply disruptions in the event of an outbreak of hostilities in the Middle East.
Added pressure from substantial increases in tobacco taxes also exacerbated the rise in the total CPI.
In contrast to recent energy-price developments, the prices of non-energy commodities, after picking up early this year with the recovery of global demand, have edged down since mid-April, as expectations of global economic growth have eased.
In particular, the price of lumber fell considerably, partly because US operators were using up stocks built up prior to confirmation by the US government of duties on softwood lumber.
Base metal prices also declined, though to a lesser extent, as demand softened.
At the same time, higher supplies contributed to lower livestock prices.
In contrast, grain prices rose considerably, chiefly reflecting the impact of the severe droughts in western Canada and elsewhere.
During the first three quarters of 2002, the Canadian economy grew at a somewhat faster pace than projected in the last Report.
Real GDP surged at an annual rate of 5.2 per cent in the first half of this year, and the most recent indicators for spending and employment suggest that real GDP likely advanced at a pace of about 4 per cent in the third quarter.
The significant easing of monetary policy in 2001 contributed importantly to improved consumer confidence and to the strong growth of household spending to date in 2002, as did the substantial gains in employment and real incomes.
Inventory accumulation resumed in the second quarter of 2002, and there has also been a significant recovery in investment in machinery and equipment.
With buoyant growth in domestic demand, import volumes also increased substantially.
Following a robust first quarter, US economic activity slowed markedly in the second quarter of this year, but available indicators suggest a rebound in the third quarter.
On average over the first three quarters of 2002, the US economy likely grew at a rate of about 3.5 per cent.
Real GDP growth over the past two years was revised downwards, lengthening the recession of the US economy in 2001.
In the Bank's view, the revisions, together with the weaker-than-expected growth in US activity in the second quarter, suggest that there is currently more slack in the US economy than was previously believed.
Current estimates of the Bank's conventional measures of potential output and the output gap indicate that economic slack had largely disappeared by the end of the summer.
Several other indicators, however, suggest less pressure on capacity than the conventional measures.
The strong increases in employment since the beginning of 2002 have been accompanied by a sharp rise in the labour-force participation rate.
Some of the increased demand for labour has therefore been met out of an increase in the supply of labour.
Indeed, it is likely that part of the increase in the participation rate reflects an upward shift in the trend rate.
The most recent survey of firms conducted by the Bank's regional offices also suggests that pressures on capacity are not widespread.
On balance, the Bank feels that the economy is currently operating with somewhat more slack than its conventional measure of the output gap would suggest.
Based on the average hourly earnings of permanent workers, the underlying rate of increase in average labour compensation seems to have eased to just below 3.0 per cent in the third quarter of 2002, compared with about 3.5 per cent early this year.
The year-over-year rise in labour compensation in the business sector has fallen appreciably since the end of 2000.
Meanwhile, labour-productivity growth increased to 3 per cent in the first half of 2002 as the economy began to recover.
With this marked pickup in productivity growth, unit labour costs in the business sector are below year-earlier levels.
In recent months, global uncertainties and financial market volatility have given rise to downside risks for global economic activity.
The potential effects of these developments on the real economy can work through a number of channels.
Higher risk premiums increase the cost of capital, and access to external financing can be curtailed if lenders are less willing or less able to supply funding.
Declines in asset prices can affect spending through their impact on the net worth of firms and households, and generalized uncertainty can also lead to delays in spending.
In a number of countries, the existence of such headwinds has been one of the reasons why policy interest rates remain well below the rates traditionally considered neutral.
The path by which the policy interest rates move back towards their neutral level will depend to a great extent on how quickly the headwinds dissipate.
Business financial conditions in North America have, on balance, deteriorated across a range of markets since the April Report.
Higher-risk corporate borrowers are facing increased costs for capital and reduced access to external financing as a result of wider corporate bond spreads, lower equity prices, and a reduced supply of bank loans.
In contrast, borrowing costs remain low for low-risk borrowers.
Spreads between the yields on corporate bonds and government bonds have increased across most investment grades.
Despite increased spreads, the rate of interest on corporate debt for higher-rated firms has declined as a result of the decrease in government bond rates.
Over the last six months, rates on medium - and long-term government bonds have fallen sharply in both Canada and the United States.
Investors' reduced tolerance for risk, leading to a portfolio shift out of equities into the bonds of low-risk borrowers, has been an important contributing factor.
Adjustment of market expectations about future policy rates also likely explains some of this decrease.
Global equity markets have exhibited considerable weakness, sustaining significant losses and experiencing periods of heightened volatility.
From the beginning of the year to early October, the S&P 500 had fallen close to 25 per cent, and in Canada the TSX had fallen by about 20 per cent.
Canadian banks remain cautious in their lending, as higher loan-loss provisions and weak revenues from capital market sources continue.
In the United States, banks continue to tighten terms and conditions on loans as a result of the poorer economic outlook, sectoral concerns, and a reduced tolerance for risk.
With firms postponing their investment plans because of a more uncertain outlook, the demand for external financing in the United States and Canada has also been declining.
In addition, some Canadian firms, which have had generally healthier profits than their US counterparts, may have relied on internal funds to finance expenditures.
As a result of these supply and demand factors, financing activity in both Canada and the United States has weakened.
Bond issuance has slowed markedly since last April, and bank credit has declined, as has the outstanding amount of commercial paper.
In Canada, this has resulted in a considerable slowing in the growth of total business credit since the last Report.
In contrast to business credit, growth in household credit has remained strong.
This reflects a marked growth in household spending, particularly in the housing market, and favourable credit conditions, including low mortgage rates and ready access to loans.
The continued accumulation of household debt has been largely matched by increases in assets.
Moreover, households appear to be well positioned to finance this debt, with the share of personal income going to debt service remaining well below historical averages.
Household wealth has been adversely affected by declines in equity prices, but the effect was partly offset by the increasing value of real estate.
There is some evidence that consumer spending is less sensitive to changes in equity prices than to changes in house prices.
The Bank raised the target overnight interest rate 25 basis points to 2.50 per cent on 4 June and again, by the same amount, on 16 July to 2.75 per cent in response to evidence that a robust recovery was underway in Canada.
Against the background of weaker near-term prospects for growth in the United States and major overseas economies, global financial market volatility, and the unsettled geopolitical situation, the Bank left the target rate unchanged at 2.75 per cent on 4 September and on 16 October.
In the United States, the Federal Reserve has left the federal funds rate unchanged this year at 1.75 per cent, after having lowered it by a total of 475 basis points in 2001.
At its March meeting, the Federal Open Market Committee decided that the risks between higher inflation and slower growth were balanced.
Increasing concerns through the summer about the implications of financial market developments for economic growth, however, led the FOMC to conclude at its August meeting that the balance of risks had tilted towards economic weakness.
Interest rate expectations embodied in futures contracts have adjusted downwards in the United States in recent months.
At the time of the April Report, futures contracts for federal funds (an indication of the expected federal funds target) suggested that markets were expecting the FOMC to raise rates in 2002, while recent levels have indicated that markets are now anticipating that rates will be stable or perhaps even move down by the end of the year.
In Canada, prices in the futures market have also declined, but still suggest a possible rise in short-term interest rates before year-end.
On a trade-weighted basis, the Canadian dollar is down slightly relative to last April.
Through the spring, the dollar strengthened in response to positive Canadian economic data, but these gains were lost in early summer, reflecting the heightened volatility in global financial markets and uncertainty about the strength of the global expansion.
The global economy continues to expand, but at a somewhat slower pace than was expected in the April Report.
Concerns about recent geopolitical tensions have added to the uncertainty in the world economy.
The economic outlook presented in this Report assumes that there will be no further major escalation of these tensions.
In the United States, recent financial market developments have negatively affected business and consumer confidence and are working to dampen the pace of economic activity.
To help offset these influences, monetary policy has remained very accommodative, with the US authorities holding rates unchanged.
Given the stance of policy, including fiscal policy, real GDP in the United States over the fourth quarter of 2002 and the first two quarters of 2003 is expected to average close to 3 per cent - slightly lower than the economy's growth potential.
Assuming that the headwinds from the recent financial developments dissipate in the second half of 2003, US economic growth is expected to pick up to a rate above its growth potential.
On an annual average basis in 2002, US economic growth would thus be about 2.5 per cent, as was expected in the April Report, but slightly weaker than projected in the last Update.
In 2003, US economic activity should increase at an annual average rate of close to 3.25 per cent, slightly less than was expected in the April Report and the last Update.
A gradual recovery should also continue to unfold in other industrialized countries.
In the major European economies, growth is expected to be close to 1 per cent on an average annual basis in 2002 and to rise to about 2.5 per cent in 2003 - which is weaker than our April projection.
In Japan, ongoing structural difficulties will continue to weigh on economic growth for some time, with a contraction of about 1 per cent expected in 2002 and modest growth of only about 0.5 per cent foreseen in 2003.
Growth prospects for a number of emerging-market economies have improved, particularly in the Southeast Asian countries.
The situation in Latin America, however, remains weak.
The US-dollar price of non-energy commodities is expected to increase by the end of 2003 as the global economic recovery continues.
Although energy prices are expected to show little change over the next few months, the possibility of an escalation of tensions in the Middle East makes these projections, particularly those for crude oil, subject to an unusually high level of uncertainty.
Over these three quarters, growth is expected to average slightly less than the economy's 3 per cent growth potential.
This is somewhat lower than was projected in the April Report and the July Update.
While the global economy is recovering, the pace is slower than previously thought.
The projected growth in Canadian export volumes to the United States is therefore expected to be more moderate.
Growth of spending on fixed capital is also expected to be marginally lower than previously projected.
Increased uncertainty related to global geopolitical tensions and the resolution of corporate reporting and governance issues are likely to cause some businesses to delay major capital expenditures.
Increases in the cost of capital related to the declines and volatility in equity markets and to increased risk premiums on lending to corporations are also expected to dampen business investment relative to earlier projections.
Nonetheless, with the Canadian economy operating close to capacity, investment spending on machinery and equipment is projected to be solid.
Moreover, capital outlays in the oil and natural gas sector are likely to strengthen if crude oil and natural gas prices remain at, or move above, recent high levels.
Household spending is still expected to grow at a healthy rate through to the end of 2003, although spending on housing and related items is likely to decline from the recent high levels.
With the US economy projected to gain momentum through 2003 and global financial conditions assumed to improve, export volumes and investment should both pick up in the second half of 2003.
This is expected to boost GDP growth above the growth rate of potential output in the second half of 2003.
Such an outlook would imply real GDP growth, on an annual average basis, of about 3.5 per cent in 2002 and in a range of 2.75 to 3.75 per cent in 2003.
The midpoint of this range for growth in 2003 is slightly below the latest average private sector consensus forecast.
This outlook suggests that, with monetary stimulus being removed from the economy in a timely and measured way, Canadian output will remain close to capacity.
With the modest downward revision to the growth outlook through to mid-2003, the Bank's best judgment is for a small amount of excess supply in the near term, which will be taken up as output growth moves above capacity growth in the second half of 2003.
But with the output gap expected to remain small, judgments about the degree of slack will need to be carefully reassessed as developments unfold.
In the regular survey reported in the Conference Board of Canada's autumn Index of Business Confidence, 21 per cent of respondents expected prices, in general, to rise over the next six months at a rate of 1 per cent or less, and 75 per cent expected a rate of 2 per cent or less.
Although both the latest survey of firms conducted by the Bank's regional offices and the average private sector forecast for the rate of increase in the total CPI suggest that inflation expectations over the near term are in the upper half of the Bank's inflation-control target range, typical forecasts of inflation for 2004 and beyond continue to be centred tightly around 2 per cent.
A number of special or "one-off" factors will continue to affect the outlook for core inflation until the second half of 2003.
The effect of the recent substantial increases in insurance premiums is expected to persist, diminishing only gradually through 2003.
The effect of the earlier depreciation of the Canadian dollar should also lessen next year, since import prices for consumer goods have recently stabilized.
Near-term movements in core inflation will also be importantly affected by the fallout from the extraordinary events of September 2001.
In the wake of the terrorist attacks in the United States, expectations of a substantially weaker economy led to unusually aggressive price discounting in the fourth quarter of 2001.
With the strong recovery in the first quarter of 2002, the amount of price discounting diminished appreciably.
Since core inflation is measured as the 12-month rate of increase in the core CPI, last year's price discounting will result in a temporary rise in core inflation in the fourth quarter of 2002.
This echo effect is expected to boost core inflation by about 0.4 percentage points.
Wage gains are expected to edge up towards the end of 2003, given the likelihood of further improvement in labour market conditions.
Indeed, the Bank's latest survey of businesses shows that more firms expect larger wage increases over the next 12 months than anticipate smaller wage gains.
With productivity growth expected to steady out at around 2 per cent, growth in unit labour costs should move up towards 2 per cent through 2003.
During most of the first half of 2002, growth in the narrow monetary aggregates, M1, M1+, M1++, slowed from the recent peak levels reached at the end of 2001.
Since May, however, growth rates of M1+ and M1++ have stabilized at levels that are still very strong, while the growth rate of M1 has surged upwards again.
This resurgence of the growth in M1 has been relatively widespread across households and firms and signals a desire to hold more liquid money or precautionary balances in the face of uncertain financial markets.
This growth has occurred despite increases in short-term interest rates since the beginning of the year.
Increased uncertainty is evident in the net outflows from equity mutual funds in June, July, and August, as well as in the increased growth of fixed-term deposits since July.
Overall, growth in M2++ has been relatively flat over the last few months, after having declined during the first part of the year.
High levels of narrow money growth have traditionally implied higher future inflation.
However, to the extent that this recent growth represents a buildup of precautionary balances in the face of uncertainty, a high rate of money growth is not inconsistent with future inflation of around 2 per cent.
In the coming months, households and businesses are likely to rebalance their portfolios, causing the growth rates of narrow money to decline to more moderate levels.
There is still a risk of increased inflation, however, if liquid balances are spent on goods and services rather than being shifted into other financial assets.
With the Canadian economy currently operating close to its production capacity and output growth expected to be close to the rate of growth of potential output, capacity pressures are not expected to exert significant upward or downward pressure on core inflation.
Nonetheless, in the near term, core inflation is expected to rise, reflecting a combination of one-off factors.
The echo effect of the unusual price discounting in the fourth quarter of 2001 is expected to push core inflation up in the fourth quarter of 2002.
The sharply higher insurance premiums are expected to hold up the 12-month rate of change of the core CPI until the second half of 2003.
And the effects of the drought in western Canada and elsewhere may result in higher prices for some food components of the core CPI in coming quarters.
The overall effect of these one-off factors is expected to peak in the fourth quarter of this year, pushing core inflation to about 3 per cent by year-end.
Through 2003, these effects are expected to diminish, so that in the second half of the year, core inflation should return to its 2 per cent target.
With economy-wide demand expected to be roughly in line with supply, core inflation should then remain close to 2 per cent.
The outlook for the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI depends importantly on the behaviour of oil prices, and oil prices are particularly difficult to forecast because of the current geopolitical tensions.
If the risk premium in current oil prices abates, and oil prices average about US$25 per barrel in coming months, total CPI inflation is expected to peak at about 3.5 per cent at the end of 2002.
Alternatively, if average oil prices remain near their recent high levels of about US$30 per barrel, total CPI inflation could rise to about 4 per cent by the end of 2002.
In 2003, total CPI inflation is expected to move back in line with core inflation.
The pace of this movement will depend on the behaviour of oil prices.
Recent experience suggests that the pass-through of temporary oil-price movements to prices of other goods and services is relatively small.
Thus, while the behaviour of total CPI inflation could be dramatically affected by the near-term behaviour of oil prices, volatile oil prices are not expected to have much of an effect on core inflation.
The Canadian economy has expanded strongly through 2002 and is now operating close to full production capacity.
At the same time, core and total CPI inflation have risen above the Bank's 2 per cent target for inflation control.
As discussed in this Report, the recent and projected near-term increases in inflation are largely explained by relative price developments in the areas of insurance premiums, energy, and tobacco taxes.
For monetary policy, what is important is that these effects not feed into price and wage inflation, but remain one-off influences on specific prices.
Last spring, against the background of a strengthening economy, the Bank began to remove the substantial amount of monetary stimulus provided in 2001.
At the same time, we are experiencing an uncertain global economy and a reduced tolerance for risk in global financial markets.
The Bank therefore decided on 4 September and 16 October to leave the target for the overnight rate of interest unchanged.
It remains the Bank's view, going forward, that further removal of monetary stimulus will be required to achieve the inflation target over the medium term.
The timing and extent of policy tightening will depend on unfolding economic, financial, and geopolitical developments and on their implications for pressures on capacity and inflation in Canada.
Two risks will have to be watched closely over the period ahead.
First, external economic, financial, and geopolitical developments may have a more persistent dampening influence on the Canadian economy than assumed in this Report.
Second, with the economy operating close to capacity and with inflation expected to rise further in the near term, inflation trends and expectations will need to be carefully monitored against the projection that core inflation will return to the 2 per cent target in the second half of 2003.
At the time of the October Monetary Policy Report, the Bank projected that core inflation would rise in the fourth quarter of 2002, reflecting a combination of one-off factors - including the rise in insurance premiums - and the "echo effect" from developments towards the end of 2001.
It was expected that the overall impact of these factors would peak in the fourth quarter, with core inflation reaching about 3 per cent at year-end, and that these effects would diminish through 2003.
Thus, core inflation and total CPI inflation were expected to return to 2 per cent in the second half of 2003.
Rates of inflation since the October Report have come in somewhat higher than expected.
This reflects not only a stronger-than-expected increase in insurance premiums but also some broadening of price pressures.
After expanding significantly faster than potential during the first half of 2002, the Canadian economy slowed to a growth rate close to potential in the second half of the year.
With this slowdown, the level of economic activity in Canada has remained near capacity since mid-year.
Indeed, the higher-than-expected rates of inflation, together with various measures of capacity pressures, may be indicating that the economy is operating closer to capacity than the Bank had previously believed.
The slowdown in economic growth in the second half of 2002 reflected the effects of financial and geopolitical uncertainties and weakness in the global economy.
While conditions in financial markets have improved, and it is assumed that they will continue to do so, significant geopolitical and economic uncertainties remain.
In these circumstances, the Bank left the target overnight rate unchanged at 2.75 per cent on 3 December and on 21 January.
On the geopolitical front, our base-case projection for economic growth in Canada this year assumes that the uncertainties regarding Middle East tensions will dissipate in the second half of 2003.
It must be recognized, however, that economic outcomes globally and in Canada could be significantly affected by how events in the Middle East actually unfold.
In the Bank's base case, the Canadian economy is expected to grow near potential in 2003.
As a result, activity levels in Canada are expected to remain close to capacity.
Core and total inflation are projected to decline through the year as the effects of the one-off factors diminish, but they will likely still be above 2 per cent at the end of 2003, higher than expected at the time of the October Report.
Overall, with the stance of monetary policy currently very stimulative, a reduction of stimulus will be required in order to return inflation to the 2 per cent target over the medium term.
A number of elements, however, will come into play in determining the pace of increase in policy interest rates.
First, although much of the recent increase in inflation has been the result of one-off factors, the possibility that demand pressures are becoming more prominent cannot be ruled out.
Second, the Bank must guard against the risk that inflation persistently above the 2 per cent target might lead to an increase in the expected trend of inflation.
Third, although we have seen an improvement in financial conditions, business and investor confidence remain fragile because of uncertainty concerning the geopolitical situation.
Fourth, the way in which developments in the Middle East unfold could affect demand and inflation, both globally and in Canada, through various channels.
In the second half of 2002, Canada's economic growth eased from the very strong pace registered earlier in the year.
Real GDP, after rising at an annual rate of 5.1 per cent in the first half of 2002, is estimated to have advanced at a rate close to 3 per cent in the second half.
With the significant monetary stimulus provided by low interest rates, household spending rose strongly in 2002.
Expenditures by businesses on machinery and equipment also recovered significantly.
Increased uncertainty about the economic outlook, however, held back the pace of non-residential construction and inventory accumulation in the second half of the year.
Although growth in Canada's exports was robust through most of 2002, it appears to have eased towards year-end because of the slowdown in the rate of economic expansion in the United States.
Conditions in financial markets have improved since the last Report.
Equity prices in both Canada and the United States have recovered from their October lows, and volatility in equity and bond markets has declined.
Spreads between yields on corporate and government bonds have narrowed but are still at high levels, particularly for riskier borrowers.
For their part, banks have remained cautious in their lending to large corporate borrowers.
Nonetheless, higher-quality borrowers have access to financing through debt capital markets at interest rates that are now near 10-year lows.
Estimates of the Bank's conventional measures of potential output and the output gap indicate that levels of activity have been close to full production capacity since mid-2002.
A number of other indicators are consistent with this assessment, including the rate of capacity utilization in the non-farm goods-producing sector, the cyclical position of profit margins, and the proportion of firms reporting shortages of skilled labour in the survey conducted by the Bank's regional offices.
However, other labour market indicators suggest somewhat greater slack than the conventional measure of the output gap.
In particular, the substantial increases in employment since the beginning of 2002 seem to have been met largely through an increased supply of labour, as evidenced by a marked increase in the participation rate and the absence of pressure on wages.
The higher-than-expected rate of core inflation also raises the possibility that there is less slack in the economy than the Bank estimated at the time of the October Report.
Core inflation was 3.1 per cent in November, higher than the level anticipated at the time of the October Report.
Other measures of trend inflation that the Bank follows closely also rose to about the same rate.
Several one-off factors helped push core inflation up in the fourth quarter of 2002.
Substantial increases in the premiums for both auto and home insurance contributed 1.0 percentage point to core inflation in November.
Year-to-year increases in electricity prices in Ontario, while easing somewhat since August, remained high.
Also contributing was the echo effect of the temporary price discounting in the fourth quarter of 2001.
At the same time, a combination of cost increases and strong demand is exerting upward pressure on prices in some sectors, such as shelter, food, and some services.
More broadly, the fact that the various one-off relative price increases are having a large impact on measures of trend inflation reflects an underlying firmness in the price-setting environment.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was 4.3 per cent in November, up from 2.6 per cent in August.
This marked increase relative to the core rate chiefly reflected substantial increases in the consumer prices of gasoline, fuel oil, and natural gas.
Prospects for economic growth in 2003 for the United States, the major overseas economies, and the emerging markets have moderated somewhat since the October Report.
However, we continue to expect global economic growth to pick up appreciably in the second half of the year and into 2004.
US economic growth, after slowing in the fourth quarter of last year by more than projected, should regain its momentum in 2003, supported by ongoing stimulative policies.
In particular, if financial conditions continue to improve, the US economy is expected to outpace growth in capacity in the second half of the year, aided by a strengthening in capital spending.
On an average annual basis, US real GDP should increase by almost 3 per cent in 2003.
In Europe, the lower projection for growth in real GDP in 2003 reflects sluggish domestic demand and slow recovery in the export sector.
In Japan, a gradual recovery should continue this year, but at a slower pace than expected at the time of the last Report, given weaker external demand.
In the rest of Asia, economic growth is expected to remain relatively strong.
For Canada, the Bank's base case projects that economic growth in 2003 will average close to the growth in potential output, which is estimated at 3 per cent.
This projection is a little lower than the most recent average private sector consensus forecast for 2003; it is also slightly below that indicated in the October Report, largely as a result of the slower growth prospects for the US and overseas economies.
Nonetheless, we anticipate increased demand pressures in the second half of 2003 and into 2004, following growth at slightly below potential in the first half of this year.
The Bank expects that the level of risk premiums in financial markets will continue to decline as corporate profitability and investor confidence solidify.
This should improve the environment for business investment.
While the core rate of inflation will likely remain well above the 2 per cent midpoint of the target range in the near term because of the one-off factors described above, the combined effect of these factors is likely to have largely run its course by early 2004.
The echo effect on the core rate arising from the unusual price discounting in the fourth quarter of 2001 should disappear by the end of the first quarter of 2003.
The recently announced return to regulated pricing of electricity in Ontario implies that the upward pressure on core inflation from electricity prices should continue to ease in coming months.
The upward movement in insurance premiums, however, is now expected to be more persistent than had been anticipated earlier.
And the effects of the drought in western Canada and elsewhere are putting pressure on the prices of some food components of the core CPI.
With a reduction in the amount of monetary stimulus, the level of output is projected to remain close to capacity during 2003 and into 2004.
As a result, we do not expect persistent pressure on inflation from the demand-supply balance.
Overall, core inflation is projected to move down to 2 per cent in early 2004.
The outlook for the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI will continue to be importantly affected by developments in crude oil prices.
If oil prices were to stay near their current high levels of just over US$30 per barrel, total CPI inflation could move up to between 4.0 and 4.5 per cent in the first quarter of 2003.
In the second half of the year, if oil prices ease back, consistent with current market expectations, total CPI inflation would move down, back in line with core inflation.
With the persistence of high rates of inflation, there is a risk of an increase in inflation expectations.
If this were to occur, inflation pressures would be stronger and the need for policy action by the Bank would be correspondingly greater.
The possible outbreak of a major military conflict in the Middle East constitutes a particularly important source of uncertainty at this time.
The effects of such a conflict on the Canadian and global economies are difficult to determine with any precision, since they depend on a variety of factors, including the timing, length, and severity of any action.
A short, decisive conflict, or an early non-military resolution of the dispute, could reduce geopolitical uncertainties fairly rapidly.
On the other hand, a prolonged major military conflict could intensify uncertainty regarding the world economic outlook and adversely affect consumer and business confidence.
In this last case, petroleum supplies could be seriously disrupted, resulting in higher oil prices, which would restrain world economic activity.
Such a price rise would also raise the value of Canadian oil exports and feed into higher total CPI inflation.
Finally, higher military spending could provide significant stimulus to US aggregate demand.
The global economic outlook has been clouded by a high degree of uncertainty, accentuated most recently by the war in Iraq.
This uncertainty has been an important factor in the recent marked volatility in world oil prices and financial markets.
Some of the geopolitical and financial uncertainty has lifted more recently, and in its base-case scenario the Bank of Canada assumes that these uncertainties will continue to recede.
As a result, confidence among businesses, households, and financial markets is expected to improve significantly by year-end.
Nevertheless, global economic uncertainty remains important, especially in the near term.
The scope for above-potential growth is greater in the United States than in Canada because of the larger amount of excess capacity in the United States.
There is, however, a wide range of possible outcomes, both stronger and weaker, around this base-case view.
The result will depend critically on the evolution of business and household confidence and global economic uncertainty.
The Bank will, therefore, be paying close attention to these factors over the coming months.
Nevertheless, most important in these times of uncertainty is the Bank's continued focus on taking the appropriate actions that, cumulatively, will return inflation to our 2 per cent target for inflation control.
Since November 2002, core CPI inflation has been well above the Bank's 2 per cent inflation-control target.
The rate of increase in the total CPI has moved up markedly, chiefly because of a substantial surge in crude oil prices.
Core CPI inflation has been higher than projected at the time of the October Report.
Between August and October of 2002, the 12-month rate of increase in the core CPI was steady at 2.5 per cent.
Since November, it has averaged just above 3 per cent and was 3.1 per cent in February.
Other measures of the trend rate of inflation that the Bank follows closely have also risen and in February were close to the core rate.
The unexpectedly marked increases in core inflation reflect a combination of one-off factors, higher costs for key inputs, and robust domestic demand.
Conspicuous among the one-off factors have been unusually large increases in the premiums for both automobile and home insurance, which have boosted inflation considerably, contributing about 1.3 percentage points to the 12-month increase in core CPI in February.
In a number of areas, higher prices for key inputs, such as energy and grains, are exerting upward pressure on the prices of final goods and services.
Most important for monetary policy are indications that strong domestic demand in some sectors is pressing up against production capacity.
The judgment that the economy is operating close to capacity is supported by the fact that even measures of core prices that strip out insurance premiums are rising at a rate of about 2 per cent.
The echo effect of the temporary discounting in the wake of 11 September 2001 is no longer influencing core CPI inflation.
While the echo effect did push up the 12-month rate of core CPI inflation in the fourth quarter of 2002, its influence had dissipated by February.
The return to regulated pricing of electricity in Ontario has stabilized the cost to consumers, although the introduction of rebates lowered consumer costs in the month they were delivered.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was 4.6 per cent in February, up two full percentage points since August.
This sharp jump relative to the core rate was mainly caused by substantial increases in the consumer prices of gasoline and fuel oil.
Ongoing fears of supply disruptions in the Middle East, in addition to the recent disruption of oil exports from Venezuela and the resulting drop in US oil stocks, had contributed to a further marked rise in crude oil prices up to mid-March.
With the easing of the threat of long-lasting disruptions to Iraqi oil production, crude oil prices have subsequently fallen back.
The rise in natural gas prices at the consumer level, reflecting both higher transportation charges and stronger demand because of unusually cold weather in North America, also contributed to the recent jump in total CPI inflation.
Prices of non-energy commodities have also risen, on balance, since last autumn.
The strength of demand in China helped raise the prices of base metals, while both livestock and pulp prices have recovered in the face of reduced supplies.
The recent decrease in the value of the US dollar against most other major currencies has also contributed to the rise in the US-dollar price of commodities.
In the second half of 2002 and early 2003, Canada's economic growth eased from its earlier vigorous pace.
Real GDP, after increasing at an annual rate of 5.2 per cent in the first half of 2002, grew at a rate of 2.6 per cent in the second half, somewhat below the Bank's estimate of the growth of production capacity of 3 per cent.
Current indicators of spending and employment suggest that real GDP rose at a pace of around two per cent in the first quarter of 2003.
After making significant gains in the first three quarters of 2002, Canada's exports fell back in the fourth quarter and in early 2003 as the rate of economic expansion in the United States slowed.
In the second half of 2002, the contribution of inventory accumulation to real GDP growth diminished appreciably, while increased uncertainty about the economic outlook led to modest cutbacks in capital spending by firms towards year-end.
At the same time, the significant monetary stimulus provided by low interest rates, together with substantial gains in employment and real incomes, contributed to further strong growth in household spending in the second half of 2002 and in the first quarter of 2003.
Demand in the overseas economies and in the United States has turned out somewhat weaker than anticipated.
The marked slowing in the US economy in the fourth quarter of last year, following a robust third quarter, was caused by weaker growth in household spending and a sharp deterioration in the trade balance.
However, total business fixed investment rose during the fourth quarter for the first time in two years and is likely to have risen further in the first quarter of this year.
In addition, despite higher oil prices, deteriorating consumer confidence, and inclement weather in February in the northeast region, US consumption growth is believed to have firmed somewhat in the first quarter of 2003.
Estimates of the Bank's conventional measures of potential output and the output gap suggest that the economy is operating very close to full production capacity.
These include Statistics Canada's measure of capacity utilization in the non-farm, goods-producing sector, profits as a share of GDP, and the proportion of firms reporting shortages of labour in the survey conducted by the Bank's regional offices.
Capacity pressures have continued to be particularly evident in the housing market.
Since early 2002, a low vacancy rate in residential accommodation has resulted in relatively high rates of increase in the prices of both new and existing homes.
At the same time, some labour market indicators suggest that there may be somewhat more slack than the conventional measure of the output gap would imply.
In particular, the considerable rise in employment since the beginning of 2002 was met largely through an increase in labour supply.
This is evidenced by a marked rise in the participation rate and an absence of upward pressure on wage increases.
Overall, the above evidence, together with the higher-than-expected rates of inflation, suggests that the economy is currently operating somewhat closer to its production capacity than the Bank believed to be the case at the time of the October Report.
Moreover, it is the Bank's view that the level of economic activity has been close to capacity since early 2002.
Based on both the average hourly earnings of permanent workers and hourly labour compensation in the business sector, the underlying rate of increase in average labour compensation seems to have eased by late 2002 to a range of 2.0 to 2.5 per cent.
However, with a slowing in productivity growth during 2002, the year-over-year rate of increase in unit labour costs in the business sector picked up in the fourth quarter to around 1.5 per cent.
The combination of healthy corporate profits and some delay by businesses in carrying out their investment plans in the face of economic and geopolitical uncertainty has resulted in very slow growth in the demand for total non-financial business credit over the past few months.
While longer-term credit, buoyed by the issuance of income trusts, has expanded at a moderate pace, short-term business credit has continued to decline.
And banks remain cautious in their lending to riskier firms.
Most spreads between the yields on corporate bonds and government bonds have narrowed since the peak reached last October, although some have recently widened again owing to a number of industry-specific concerns.
Nonetheless, spreads are still high compared with their historical averages, especially for non-investment-grade issuers.
Stock prices have picked up from the lows reached in October 2002 but remain sensitive to geopolitical developments.
Equity market volatility rose in March, but has declined more recently.
Weak equity issuance suggests a lack of investor enthusiasm for new stock issues and a difficult environment for riskier borrowers.
In sharp contrast to business credit, growth in household credit remains at a high level, supported by low interest rates and strong employment growth.
Although Canadian households are accumulating debt, their financial situation remains sound and is not acting as a drag on their consumption.
Higher debt levels have been partly matched by higher income levels, and with interest rates at very low levels, the debt-service ratio remains low by historical standards.
It thus appears that, while higher interest rates would dampen consumption, the effect would not be significantly magnified by the size or composition of household debt.
Moreover, gains in house prices continue to offset the capital losses from the stock market, contributing to healthy household balance sheets.
On the October and December 2002 announcement dates, the Bank decided to keep its key interest rate unchanged, in light of the weakening global economic situation and the economic, financial, and geopolitical uncertainties.
Although the policy rate also remained unchanged in January, the Bank drew attention in the press release to its view that the greater-than-anticipated increases in core and total CPI indicated that the economy might be operating closer to its production capacity than previously believed.
On both the March and April announcement dates, the Bank raised its target for the overnight rate by 25 basis points, bringing it to 3.25 per cent.
These decisions were taken against the backdrop of persistently high inflation rates, the expectation that Canadian economic activity would remain near potential, and the stimulative stance of monetary policy.
The yield curve in Canada has continued to flatten since October.
Short-term market interest rates have moved higher, reflecting not only higher current policy rates, but also market expectations of further increases.
In contrast, the yield curve in the United States has steepened, with the decline in US short-term interest rates reflecting market expectations of lower policy rates in the near future.
The Canadian dollar has recently been trading above 68 cents US, reaching a three-year high.
Since the October Report, the Canadian dollar has appreciated by 8.2 per cent, on average, against the currencies of its major trading partners.
Over this period, the US dollar has weakened significantly against other major currencies, most notably the euro and the Swiss franc.
These currencies benefited from safe-haven flows in the prevailing uncertain environment.
The Bank's monetary conditions index has risen sharply since the October Report, owing to the rise in the target for the overnight rate and the appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
The global economy continues to expand, but at a slower pace than projected in the October Report and the January Update.
Given that economic uncertainty remains an important factor, global economic growth over the near term will likely remain subdued.
But with geopolitical uncertainty lessening, world oil prices down significantly, and financial conditions improving, the risks confronting the global economy are better balanced.
Looking further out, the Bank expects a more robust economic environment, particularly in the United States.
US economic growth is now projected to increase at a rate below that country's growth potential in the first three quarters of the year.
As confidence levels improve, however, the stimulative stance of monetary policy, together with tax cuts and increased defence spending, should support an expansion to a rate above the economy's growth potential towards the end of the year and through 2004.
Both consumer spending and business expenditures on capital equipment are expected to strengthen over this projection horizon.
On an average annual basis, real GDP should thus increase by about 2.5 per cent in 2003.
The Bank believes that US economic activity will pick up to a rate of about 4 per cent in 2004.
A similar rebound in the pace of expansion is less certain in other industrialized countries, where there are signs of persistently weak growth in domestic demand.
In the euro area, economic growth is expected to be about 1 per cent, on an average annual basis, in 2003 (weaker than our October projection) and to rise to about 2.25 per cent in 2004.
In Japan, ongoing structural difficulties will continue to weigh on economic growth for some time, with a modest expansion of about 0.5 per cent expected in 2003 and growth of close to 1 per cent foreseen in 2004.
In Asia, growth is expected to remain comparatively robust, although the possible spread of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome increases the uncertainty surrounding this projection.
The outlook for Latin America remains clouded.
The expected pickup in global economic growth should lead to further gains in the US-dollar price of non-energy commodities during 2004.
With crude oil prices having fallen markedly since mid-March, the Bank's base-case scenario assumes that the price of West Texas Intermediate crude oil will average about US$28 per barrel in the second quarter of 2003, and will ease after mid-year.
Natural gas prices are likely to remain near their current high levels over the remainder of 2003.
These assumptions are broadly consistent with current market expectations.
While indicators point to a weaker near-term global economic outlook, domestic demand in Canada has remained firm with continued employment gains.
Given the underlying strength of domestic demand and with the expected pickup in US economic activity towards year-end, the Bank continues to see the need for further removal of monetary stimulus over time to return inflation to its 2 per cent target and to maintain output levels close to capacity.
Economic growth in Canada is now expected to average near 2.5 per cent over the first three quarters of 2003.
The recent climate of uncertainty has led many businesses to delay decisions to invest in fixed capital, and the effects will be felt over the coming months.
Inventory accumulation is also likely to ease, since some of the recent inventory buildup appears to have been unintended.
The growth in household expenditures is also expected to decrease from the strong pace registered in 2002.
While continued US economic growth, albeit moderate, in the first three quarters of 2003 should underpin the demand for exports, the higher level of the Canadian dollar will have a dampening effect.
Spending on goods and services by all levels of government is expected to rise solidly during this period.
The growth of aggregate demand in Canada should begin to strengthen appreciably towards year-end and through 2004.
The anticipated pickup in the US economy is expected to boost Canadian exports.
Moreover, conventional drilling by the oil and natural gas sector is likely to increase considerably during 2003, reflecting the high prices of crude oil and natural gas.
Economic growth in 2003 is expected to average about 2.5 per cent.
This projection is lower than that in the January Update and than the average private sector consensus forecast for 2003.
It is also below the projection in the October Report, largely because of weaker growth prospects in 2003 for the United States and overseas economies.
In terms of the level of economic activity, this scenario implies that by the end of 2004 most of the small amount of slack that is likely to open up over the first two or three quarters of this year will have closed.
On an annual average basis, this would mean growth of around 3 per cent, below the latest private sector consensus forecast.
In the regular survey reported in the Conference Board of Canada's spring Index of Business Confidence, 53 per cent of respondents expected prices, in general, to rise over the next six months at a rate of over 2 per cent.
This proportion is up from 25 per cent last autumn.
The survey of firms conducted by the Bank's regional offices indicates that 83 per cent of the businesses surveyed were expecting inflation over the next two years to be above the Bank's 2 per cent target, compared with 66 per cent of businesses surveyed last September.
And the average private sector consensus forecast for the rate of increase in the total CPI in 2003 is 3 per cent, compared with 2.4 per cent last October.
These near-term inflation expectations have undoubtedly been influenced by recent increases in energy prices at the consumer level.
While near-term inflation expectations have risen, the average private sector forecast for total CPI inflation in 2004 has remained close to 2 per cent.
Typical forecasts of longer-term inflation similarly continue to be centred tightly around 2 per cent.
On the other hand, the yield differential between 30-year conventional and Real Return bonds has crept up close to 2.5 per cent.
Liquidity and technical factors are, however, making this spread difficult to interpret.
The one-off factors that have recently pushed core inflation up to around 3 per cent will likely continue to hold the core rate up over the near term.
The impact on the core rate of recent hikes in insurance premiums is expected to persist through mid-2003, before gradually diminishing into early 2004.
The effects of last year's drought in western Canada and elsewhere are expected to put further upward pressure on the prices of some food components in the core CPI through most of 2003.
There is some risk of a pass-through of the recent substantial increases in energy costs to the prices of other goods and services.
Recent experience suggests, however, that this pass-through effect is likely to be relatively small.
Similarly, the effect on core inflation of the recent appreciation of the Canadian dollar is likely to be small, since the pass-through from the exchange rate to this index has been modest throughout the past decade.
The effect of the exchange rate movement on total CPI will be somewhat larger than on core CPI, reflecting the different baskets of goods and services included.
Wage increases are expected to rise slightly through 2004.
For example, the Bank's latest survey of businesses shows that a greater percentage of firms expect larger wage increases over the next 12 months than anticipate smaller wage gains.
Labour productivity growth is expected to be near 2 per cent over the next two years, with growth in unit labour costs edging up towards 2 per cent through 2004.
During most of the second half of 2002 and early 2003, growth in the narrow monetary aggregates - gross M1, M1+, M1++ - has been slowing from its earlier very strong pace.
The accumulation of precautionary balances by both households and firms that occurred earlier at a time of sharp declines in equity prices, increasing financial turbulence, and rising geopolitical uncertainty appears to have stopped.
Nevertheless, households and firms continue to hold high levels of money balances.
Households have been readjusting their portfolios to a significant extent in the last few months.
There have been outflows from equity mutual funds since June 2002, owing in part to a shift by households from such funds towards fixed-term deposits and fixed-income mutual funds.
There has also been an increased demand for real assets, as evidenced by the strength of the housing market over the last year.
The weakening of the narrow aggregates and of a number of components of M2++ has contributed to a pronounced decline in the growth rate of M2++.
The sharp deceleration in the monetary aggregates in recent months does not present a significant risk to the inflation outlook.
The growth rate of narrow money is still above the rate consistent with 2 per cent inflation, and households continue to hold unusually high levels of precautionary balances.
Thus, continuing slow money growth would be consistent with inflation returning to its 2 per cent target for inflation control.
The core rate of inflation is expected to remain near 3 per cent through mid-2003, largely because of the persistence of the one-off factors described earlier.
But the combined effect of these factors should decrease significantly after that and will likely have largely run its course by early 2004.
With the balance of aggregate demand and supply likely to be a source of slight downward pressure on inflation over the projection horizon, and given that the effect of one-off factors is expected to diminish after mid-2003, core inflation is projected to move down to about 2.5 per cent in the second half of 2003 and to about 2 per cent by early 2004.
The outlook for the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI will continue to be heavily influenced by developments in markets for crude oil.
If oil prices were to average about US$28 per barrel in coming months, total CPI inflation would be expected to ease to around 3.75 per cent in the second quarter.
If crude oil prices were then to settle down at about US$25 per barrel, broadly consistent with futures prices, total CPI inflation would likely fall temporarily below the core rate in the first half of next year, before steadying out at a rate close to core inflation.
Since the Bank's last Monetary Policy Report, both core and total CPI inflation have been well above the 2 per cent inflation target.
While one-off factors, particularly higher insurance premiums, and increased costs for some key product inputs have contributed importantly to high inflation, price pressures arising from strong domestic demand have also been at play.
Indeed, although external demand for Canadian products has weakened, our economy has continued to operate close to full production capacity because of strong domestic demand.
In this environment, inflation expectations have edged up.
In view of the domestic inflation situation and the underlying momentum of domestic demand, the Bank raised its target overnight rate on each of its last two policy announcement dates by 25 basis points, bringing it to 3.25 per cent.
Economic, financial, and geopolitical uncertainty has also figured prominently in the global economic picture over the past six months.
Some of the geopolitical and financial uncertainty has lifted more recently, and the Bank expects that it will continue to recede.
Global economic uncertainty remains important, however, especially over the near term.
Overall, the risks confronting the world economy now appear to be better balanced compared with last autumn, and by year-end, business and household confidence levels should be much higher.
Thus, while global economic uncertainty will likely continue to dampen growth over the near term, activity should begin to strengthen towards the end of this year and through 2004, particularly in North America.
Given the underlying momentum of domestic demand, and an expectation that external demand for Canadian products will strengthen as uncertainties recede and confidence improves, the Bank continues to believe that further reductions in monetary stimulus will be necessary over time to return inflation to its 2 per cent target and to sustain output levels close to capacity.
The timing and pace of further increases in policy interest rates will depend on the strength of domestic demand, the evolution of inflation expectations, and the pace of economic expansion in the United States and in overseas economies.
Since the April Monetary Policy Report, there have been a number of unanticipated developments that have changed the outlook for inflation and economic activity in Canada.
Both inflation and inflation expectations have declined more rapidly than the Bank had expected.
Near-term domestic activity has been undercut by the effects of severe acute respiratory syndrome and an isolated case of bovine spongiform encephalopathy in Canada.
Foreign demand for Canadian products has also been weaker than earlier anticipated.
As well, the substantial rise in the value of the Canadian dollar against the US dollar will have a dampening effect on the future growth of demand for Canadian goods and services and will contribute to downward pressure on the prices of some components of the CPI.
In this context, inflation pressures have eased, more slack is developing in the economy than had been expected, and the output gap at the end of 2003 will be larger than projected in the April Report.
It now appears that core inflation will fall below the 2 per cent target by year-end.
In response to these changing circumstances, the Bank left the target for the overnight rate unchanged on 3 June, seeing less need to reduce the amount of monetary stimulus being provided, and on 15 July it lowered the target rate by 25 basis points to 3 per cent.
This change in policy stance will provide additional near-term support for domestic demand growth and, consequently, for levels of aggregate demand consistent with keeping inflation on track to meet the 2 per cent target over the medium term.
The Bank expects that growth in the Canadian economy will strengthen towards the end of 2003 and through 2004.
Factors supporting this outlook include the unwinding of the adverse effects of SARS and BSE, the expected rebound in the US economy, the much-improved tone in capital markets, and the underlying strength of Canadian domestic demand.
A number of risks surround this base-case scenario.
On the upside, the recent strengthening in global equity markets, combined with the stimulative stance of macroeconomic policies in the major industrialized countries, could lead to a stronger global economic recovery than assumed in this Update.
On the downside, prospects for US demand for Canadian goods and services could be weaker than currently assumed, particularly if the expected recovery in US investment spending is delayed.
The Bank will monitor these risks closely.
After expanding at a vigorous pace in the first half of 2002, Canada's real GDP advanced by a modest 2.3 per cent (annual rate) between mid-2002 and the first quarter of 2003 and is estimated to have been flat in the second quarter.
Exports fell in the fourth quarter of 2002 and in the first half of 2003 as the pace of economic expansion in the United States slowed.
Exports in the second quarter of 2003 were also held back by the adverse economic effects associated with SARS and BSE.
Travel to Canada decreased sharply following the outbreak of SARS in the Greater Toronto Area, and cattle and beef exports have been halted pending the investigation of one case of BSE in Alberta.
In contrast, growth in household spending was robust in the second half of 2002 and in the first quarter of 2003, boosted by low interest rates.
However, the pace of expansion of household expenditures moderated somewhat in the second quarter.
Conditions in financial markets have continued to improve since the April Report.
The predominant developments have been a global portfolio reallocation into higher-yield fixed-income assets, which has further reduced spreads on corporate and emerging-market debt vis--vis benchmark government bonds, and a continuation of the equity market recovery that began in March.
Equity markets were buoyed by a combination of low interest rates, generally positive first-quarter earnings, and increasing confidence that the pace of expansion in the US economy will pick up.
Over the period, yields on longer-term bonds fell by about 80 basis points but subsequently rose by some 50 basis points.
The Canadian dollar has appreciated from a range of 67.5 to 69 US cents to a range of 72 to 75 US cents since the April Report.
Both the magnitude and speed of this appreciation have been greater than the Bank had anticipated.
This movement is part of a broader multilateral adjustment in the US real exchange rate.
Foreign investors have become less willing to accumulate US-dollar assets to finance large ongoing US current account deficits.
The appreciation also reflects the relative strength of domestic demand in Canada, where the economy is operating closer to full capacity than in the United States.
This relative strength has been reflected in widening interest rate differentials with the United States.
The Bank's conventional measures of potential output and the output gap indicate that the level of economic activity was near full capacity in the first quarter of 2003 and fell below full capacity in the second quarter.
A number of indicators support the view that a small amount of slack had opened up by mid-year.
The unemployment rate rose slightly, and in the regular survey conducted by the Bank's regional offices the proportion of firms reporting shortages of labour diminished further.
Rates of increase in the prices of both new and existing homes have also eased since late 2002.
Core inflation was 2.3 per cent in May, lower than projected at the time of the April Report and down considerably since February.
Other measures of trend inflation have also eased.
A sharp slowdown in the rate of increase in the premiums for automobile insurance was a significant contributing factor in these developments.
Sharply lower levels of activity in tourism-related sectors contributed to marked price reductions, although much of this price discounting is expected to be temporary.
A somewhat lower-than-expected level of inflation was also evident in the prices of a broad range of core products and services.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was 2.9 per cent in May, down from 4.6 per cent in February.
In addition to the factors pushing down the core rate, the prices of gasoline and fuel oil eased considerably from the levels reached in February.
Most of the measures of inflation expectations that the Bank follows have declined since mid-April, and all the medium - and longer-term measures are now close to 2 per cent.
In particular, the consensus forecast for CPI inflation in 2004 is 2 per cent.
As well, the percentage of firms in the Bank's regional survey that expect CPI inflation to exceed 3 per cent on average over the next two years has fallen to 5 per cent in the most recent survey, from 26 per cent in the survey conducted three months earlier.
Prospects for global economic growth in 2003 have softened somewhat since the April Report.
Nevertheless, with the reduction in geopolitical uncertainty, the marked improvement in capital markets, and the easing of macroeconomic policy in many industrial countries, the Bank continues to expect the pace of global expansion to strengthen towards the end of the year and through 2004, especially in the United States and Canada.
Growth in US economic activity is estimated to have been about 1.25 per cent over the first half of the year, weaker than assumed in the April Report and well below that country's growth potential.
Stimulative monetary and fiscal policies, the lower level of the US dollar, and the recent rise in consumer confidence, combined with the upturn in equity markets, should support a rebound in US economic growth during the second half of the year.
Expansion to a rate above the economy's growth potential is projected by year-end and through 2004.
Business expenditures on capital equipment are expected to strengthen over this projection horizon.
On an average annual basis, US real GDP should increase by just over 2 per cent in 2003 and by 4 per cent in 2004.
This projection is similar to the most recent average private sector consensus forecast for 2003 and slightly above the consensus outlook for 2004.
Although the projection for 2003 is somewhat lower than in the April Report, the overall projection is broadly similar.
Owing to the restraining effects of the recent appreciation of the euro against the US dollar, the recovery in Europe over the remainder of this year is expected to be more modest than was projected in the April Report.
Economic conditions in Japan are expected to remain subdued.
With weaker global demand, prospects for emerging-market economies have deteriorated somewhat.
Growth in Asia is projected to remain comparatively robust, despite the negative effects of SARS.
In Canada, economic growth is expected to strengthen towards the end of 2003 and through 2004.
The Bank's base-case projection assumes that the confidence level of foreigners concerning travel to Canada will gradually improve over the remainder of this year and that cattle and beef exports will resume soon.
As a result, the dampening effects of SARS and BSE on the level of aggregate economic activity in Canada should be short-lived.
Thus, while growth in the third quarter is expected to be somewhat lower than the 2 1/2 per cent anticipated last April, it is projected to pick up to the 3 per cent rate of growth of potential in the fourth quarter and to gather further strength over the course of 2004.
Growth through 2004 is projected to be higher than previously anticipated.
Such a scenario would imply that the slack that is expected to open up in 2003 will be largely absorbed by the end of 2004.
Since the boost to Canadian exports from the anticipated rebound in the US economy will be tempered by the dampening effects of the recent appreciation of the Canadian dollar, more of the growth in aggregate demand will have to come from domestic sources.
These include household spending, which is expected to rise at a solid pace, given the effects of continued monetary stimulus, and business investment, which should strengthen with the assumed improvement in business confidence.
This outlook would imply real GDP growth, on an average annual basis, of about 2 per cent in 2003 and just over 3 per cent in 2004.
This projection for 2004 is in line with the most recent average private sector consensus forecast, while that for 2003 is slightly lower.
The core rate of inflation is expected to move down below the 2 per cent target in the fourth quarter of 2003 and to remain below the target through 2004, before returning to 2 per cent by mid-2005.
The slack in product and labour markets should be a source of downward pressure on inflation over the projection horizon.
The effects of one-off factors, such as the recent hikes in insurance premiums, that pushed core inflation up close to 3 per cent earlier this year should continue to diminish.
The recent substantial appreciation of the Canadian dollar is likely to be another source of downward pressure on the core rate over this period - though this effect is still expected to be relatively small.
Some of the recent price discounting in tourism-related industries should moderate later in 2003 as activity returns to more normal levels.
Developments in crude oil markets will continue to have important effects on the outlook for the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI.
Based on the assumption that oil prices will ease to about US$25 per barrel early in 2004 (close to current market expectations), total CPI inflation will likely fall below core inflation in 2004, before steadying out at a rate close to 2 per cent in 2005.
Since the effect of the exchange rate appreciation on the total CPI is likely to be larger than on the core CPI, this will also tend to lower total CPI inflation relative to core inflation in the next few quarters.
In the April Monetary Policy Report, the Bank noted that inflation was well above its 2 per cent target and that short-term inflation expectations had edged up.
Although inflation was being pushed up by special factors, particularly insurance premiums and energy costs, there were also signs that strong domestic demand was working to broaden price pressures.
In April, we projected that Canadian economic growth would average 2.5 per cent in the first three quarters of the year and that core inflation would fall to 2 per cent by early 2004.
So the Bank now estimates that there is more slack in the economy than was projected in April.
Moreover, the decline in core inflation occurred earlier, and has been more pronounced, than we had projected.
As well, virtually all measures of inflation expectations have decreased since April.
This drop in core inflation reflected several unforeseen developments over the last six months.
These include broad-based weakness in the prices of goods, such as automobiles and clothing, substantial reductions in the prices of tourism-related services owing to the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome , and a slightly faster easing of pressures from insurance premiums.
The substantial fall in the value of the US dollar added to the weakness in goods prices in Canada.
The Canadian dollar has averaged 72.5 cents US since the July Monetary Policy Report Update, a sharp increase from the 69-cent level reached at the time of the April Report.
It now appears that core inflation will stay below 2 per cent until mid-2005, reflecting the excess supply in the economy, more moderate rises in insurance premiums, and the remaining impact of the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
Against this background, the Bank has reduced its target for the overnight rate by a total of 50 basis points since the April Report, bringing it to 2.75 per cent.
This action was taken to support a return to levels of economic activity consistent with an overall balance between supply and demand, with the aim of bringing inflation back to the 2 per cent target over the medium term.
Despite a weak second quarter and additional third-quarter shocks, such as the power blackout in Ontario, there have been a number of encouraging developments.
Growth in final domestic demand has remained robust, and the adverse effects of some of the recent shocks are beginning to dissipate.
Global economic conditions have improved since the April Report, and recent data indicate that the anticipated recovery in the United States is taking place earlier and will be stronger than previously expected.
Financial conditions are also supportive of growth.
The Bank continues to expect growth in the Canadian economy to strengthen during the fourth quarter of 2003 and through 2004.
On balance, this expansion should be above the rate of potential growth, relying primarily on solid household spending and increased business investment.
Stronger economic growth abroad should also boost foreign demand for Canadian goods and services, but this source of strength will be dampened by the higher value of the Canadian dollar.
There are risks to this outlook related to the timing and magnitude of global demand, price, and exchange rate adjustments to economic imbalances.
In particular, there is uncertainty both about the likely changes in key global exchange rates and about their effect on the Canadian economy.
There is also uncertainty about the sustainability of US growth beyond mid-2004.
The Bank will closely monitor and assess the implications of all these global adjustments for output and inflation in Canada.
Core CPI inflation has decreased considerably since February and in August was below the Bank's 2 per cent inflation-control target.
The rate of increase in the total CPI has fallen even more markedly, reflecting lower year-to-year increases in the prices of gasoline and fuel oil.
Core CPI inflation has come down faster than was projected in either the April Report or the July Update.
The core rate was 1.5 per cent in August, down from 3.1 per cent last February.
Other measures of the trend rate of inflation that the Bank follows closely have also decreased considerably and in August were very close to the core rate.
At the time of the April Report, both core and total CPI inflation were well above the 2 per cent target.
While one-off factors had contributed importantly to high inflation, there was evidence that some of the price pressures stemmed from robust domestic demand.
The core rate of inflation was projected to remain above 2 per cent through 2003 and to move down to the 2 per cent target by early 2004, as the effect of one-off factors (such as the earlier large increases in insurance premiums) diminished.
In fact, the core rate fell sooner and by more than anticipated.
This surprisingly early and sharp drop in core inflation has reflected a combination of unanticipated developments over the last six months: broad-based weakness in the prices of many goods, the adverse economic effects of an outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome and of an isolated case of bovine spongiform encephalopathy , and a slightly faster-than-expected unwinding of the one-off factors.
The most important of these unexpected developments was the degree of weakness in the prices of many durable and semi-durable goods, such as automobiles and clothing.
The relative importance of the various factors behind this weakness is not entirely clear.
Part of the downward pressure on these prices came from discounting by retailers in an effort to reduce an undesired inventory buildup.
The downward pressures on import prices arising from declining world prices for many goods and from a rising Canadian dollar were also stronger than expected.
Substantial reductions in tourist spending, exacerbated by a temporary outbreak of SARS in the Greater Toronto Area, contributed to considerable cutbacks in the prices of related services.
As the adverse effects of SARS gradually unwind, these prices should return to more normal levels.
Beef prices in Canada (at both the producer and consumer level) have also weakened in recent months with the buildup of supplies following the imposition of trade restrictions on Canadian beef by the United States and other countries.
Prominent among the one-off factors affecting core inflation have been substantial increases in the premiums for both automobile and home insurance.
Over the past six months, increases in auto insurance premiums have been slightly lower than anticipated.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was 2.0 per cent in August, down from 4.6 per cent in February.
In addition to the factors acting to reduce the core rate, year-to-year increases in the consumer prices of gasoline and fuel oil have eased considerably since February.
On balance, crude oil prices have decreased since mid-March, although by less than we had expected in the last Report.
In contrast, prices of non-energy commodities have continued to move up.
Indications of robust Asian demand and strengthening US economic growth contributed to gains in the prices of base metals, while a combination of production curtailments (exacerbated by the forest fires in British Columbia this summer) and continued strong housing demand helped to boost lumber prices.
Canada's real GDP advanced at a moderate pace in the first quarter of 2003 but edged down at an annual rate of 0.3 per cent in the second quarter, a weaker result than had been expected in the last Report.
The most recent indicators for spending and activity suggest that economic growth resumed in the third quarter but remained slightly below potential at about 2.5 per cent.
An important factor behind the weakness of aggregate activity in the second quarter of 2003 was the unexpectedly sharp drop in inventory investment.
After experiencing a considerable buildup of stocks early this year, retailers and wholesalers slashed their rates of inventory accumulation in the second quarter.
A number of unusual shocks also acted to dampen economic activity in both the second and third quarters.
Nevertheless, a number of positive developments have provided underlying support to the economy.
Growth in household spending has been robust, boosted by low interest rates.
In particular, housing expenditures have remained strong, and housing prices have continued to increase.
As well, capital spending by firms picked up in the first half of the year.
Economic activity in the United States gathered momentum in the second quarter of this year owing to solid gains in household and business spending, as well as a sharp increase in federal defence outlays.
Recent data suggest that both consumption and investment are continuing to rise at a robust pace, supported by the easing in monetary and fiscal policy and a reduction in uncertainty.
Real GDP growth is expected to be around 5.75 per cent in the third quarter.
The Bank's conventional measures of potential output and the output gap indicate that the level of economic activity fell below production capacity in the second and third quarters of this year.
Several indicators are consistent with the view that slack has developed since early 2003.
Capacity utilization in the non-farm, goods-producing sector eased in the second quarter of 2003.
The unemployment rate has risen, and, in the regular survey conducted by the Bank's regional offices, the proportion of firms reporting labour shortages has fallen below its average of the last four years.
The relatively low rates of wage increases are further evidence of excess supply in labour markets.
And measures of the trend rate of inflation have been lower than expected.
On balance, it is the Bank's view that the economy is currently operating with somewhat more slack than its conventional measure of the output gap would suggest.
In particular, with the actual labour force participation rate continuing to rise through September, it is likely that the trend component of the participation rate is higher than assumed by the conventional measure.
With this revised assessment of potential and the unexpected interruption in economic growth in the second quarter, the estimated amount of slack in the economy at mid-year is larger than was projected in the last Report.
Two broad-based measures of average labour compensation - the average hourly earnings of permanent workers and hourly labour compensation in the business sector - both indicate that the underlying rate of increase in wages has been in a range of 1.75 per cent to 2.25 per cent since late 2002.
However, with a decrease in productivity over the last year, unit labour costs in the business sector in the second quarter of 2003 were about 2.5 per cent higher than year-earlier levels.
Financial conditions have generally improved since the April Report.
Stock markets have rallied, corporate bond spreads have narrowed further, and the yield curve has steepened.
The financial situations and profitability of banks in Canada have improved, a positive sign for future credit conditions.
At the same time, prices in some markets have been quite volatile, reflecting changing views about global growth and uncertainty about the resolution of growing global imbalances.
Stock markets in Canada and the United States have been lifted by a combination of positive earnings and increasing confidence in a strong recovery.
Volatility in these markets has remained low.
Even with these improvements, equity issuance by non-financial firms in Canada is still low, but the issuance of income trusts has been strong and has become an important alternative source of financing for firms.
In the bond market, improving financial conditions have been reflected in a decline in the spread between the yields on corporate and government bonds for both investment-grade and non-investment-grade firms.
Measures of credit quality, such as the downgrade/upgrade ratio, have also improved, reflecting the efforts of firms to restructure their balance sheets and reduce debt.
Despite easier access to credit, growth in total business credit continues to be sluggish, reflecting weak demand.
First, firms are waiting for clearer signs regarding the strength and sustainability of the recovery in the United States, and in the global economy generally, before undertaking major investment projects.
Second, some firms are relying on internal funds to finance expenditures, since corporate profits have remained healthy despite the recent retreat from the record high level seen in the first quarter.
Third, as firms have reduced inventories, short-term credit demand has fallen sharply.
In contrast to business credit, growth in household credit, particularly mortgage credit, has remained strong.
This reflects favourable credit conditions (particularly low mortgage rates) in addition to sustained, albeit more modest, income growth.
Despite recent increases in mortgage rates, the estimated debt-service ratio remains below its average over the last decade.
Furthermore, although households continue to accumulate debt, their balance sheets are still healthy, supported mainly by strong gains in housing prices.
Interest rates across the term structure have fallen in Canada since April, with a larger decline for short-term instruments, leading to a steepening of the yield curve.
The lower level of short-term market interest rates reflects not only the lower policy rate, but also market expectations that short-term rates will stay low and stable for some time.
Over the same period, medium - and longer-term yields have been subject to sharp swings, falling abruptly between April and June and rebounding as the outlook for global growth improved, led by increasing confidence in the US economic recovery.
These movements in bond yields have been a global phenomenon, most pronounced in the US and Japanese markets.
Since reaching a three-year high of approximately 69 cents US at the time of the last Report, the Canadian dollar has continued its sharp appreciation, rising above 75 cents in October.
Like many currencies, the Canadian dollar was influenced by the broad-based weakness in the US dollar over the period.
The Canadian dollar was further supported by rising commodity prices and the smaller amount of excess capacity in the Canadian economy than in the US economy.
Global economic conditions have brightened since the April Report, supported by monetary and fiscal stimulus.
While geopolitical uncertainty has waned, growing imbalances in the global economy pose their own challenges.
In the United States, economic prospects have improved since the July Update, and short-term risks to the outlook for growth now seem better balanced.
US economic activity is projected to increase at a rate significantly above the economy's growth potential in the second half of the year, boosted by tax rebates to households and an upswing in business spending.
Continued stimulative monetary and fiscal policies and the past depreciation of the US dollar should support the economic expansion into 2004.
Sustained domestic demand should encourage business to restock.
On an average annual basis, real GDP is projected to increase by about 2.75 per cent in 2003.
This is more than was projected in both the last Update and the April Report and reflects the apparent revival in business confidence and spending.
The Bank expects that US economic activity will pick up to a rate of about 4 per cent in 2004, which is similar to expectations at the time of the April Report and July Update, and assumes in its base case that output will continue to grow above the rate of growth of potential in 2005.
The projection for 2003 is slightly higher than the most recent average private sector consensus forecast, while that for 2004 is similar.
On an average annual basis, the Bank projects economic growth in the euro area of about 0.5 per cent in 2003, rising to about 1.5 per cent in 2004.
Led by robust growth in China and India, the emerging Asian economies are expected to register the fastest rate of expansion of any world region this year and next.
Although the SARS outbreak has affected many countries in the area, its economic impact was limited, and local activity is returning to normal.
In Japan, economic momentum appears to be picking up more rapidly than was assumed, as strengthening demand in the rest of Asia provides a boost to Japanese exports.
Structural difficulties persist, however, and this suggests that growth will likely remain moderate over the near term.
A 2.75 per cent expansion in the Japanese economy is projected in 2003, followed by growth of about 1.5 per cent in 2004.
The expected strengthening in the pace of global economic expansion and robust demand in a number of Asian economies should contribute to further increases in the US-dollar price of non-energy commodities in 2004.
Crude oil prices, on the other hand, are assumed to ease to about US$27 per barrel next year and remain there in 2005, based on the assumption of a continued gradual recovery in Iraqi oil production.
Natural gas prices are expected to remain near their current levels in coming months.
Although a global economic recovery appears to be underway, some risks associated with global imbalances remain.
Because of various factors, including stronger growth in the United States than elsewhere in recent years, external imbalances have widened.
The correction of these imbalances will require a relative slowing of domestic demand in the United States and a strengthening of demand elsewhere.
And this will require some further significant adjustments in real exchange rates among currencies in industrial and emerging-market countries.
In view of the amount of excess supply in the global economy, such correction must take place alongside a strengthening of global demand.
Meanwhile, growing fiscal indebtedness in many countries is absorbing an increasing portion of global savings.
At some point in the medium term, this could lead to higher-than-normal real interest rates, which would crowd out private investment.
Eventually, fiscal consolidation will be required to ensure fiscal sustainability.
This will be especially important in industrial countries where an aging population will affect longer-term fiscal positions.
Current conditions bode well for stronger growth in the Canadian economy.
The economic rebound in the United States appears to be stronger than previously anticipated, and recent indicators of Canadian household spending have also been more buoyant than expected.
Overall, economic growth is projected to average close to 3 1/4 per cent in the second half of this year.
This outlook also incorporates expectations of a gradual improvement in the level of travel to Canada by foreigners, as well as the effect of a partial lifting of the ban on exports of Canadian beef products.
Some rebound in activity is therefore expected in industries that have been adversely affected by SARS and BSE.
The rate of economic growth is projected to remain above that of production capacity through 2004 such that the slack that developed in the economy this year will be absorbed by early 2005.
Because the boost to Canadian exports from the anticipated continuing recovery in the US economy will be dampened by the earlier appreciation of the Canadian dollar, much of the growth in aggregate demand will have to come from domestic sources.
Household spending is expected to rise at a moderate pace, supported by continued monetary stimulus.
Business investment should grow strongly with the evidence of a strengthening US economy, the recent improvement in financial conditions, the recovery in business confidence, and the lower costs of imported machinery and equipment arising from the increased value of the Canadian dollar against the US dollar.
This outlook implies real GDP growth, on an average annual basis, of about 2 per cent in 2003 and 3.25 per cent in 2004.
While lower than that shown in the April Report, the projection for 2003 is the same as that in the July Update.
The projections for both 2003 and 2004 are roughly similar to the most recent average private sector consensus forecasts.
This economic outlook is consistent with modest increases in employment to the end of 2004, given a likely robust pickup in labour productivity growth over this period.
Virtually all of the measures of inflation expectations that the Bank follows have decreased since mid-April, and all the medium - and longer-term measures are now close to 2 per cent.
In the regular survey reported in the Conference Board of Canada's autumn Index of Business Confidence, 81 per cent of respondents expected prices, in general, to rise over the next six months at a rate of 2 per cent or less.
This proportion is up from 46 per cent last spring.
In addition, the percentage of firms in the Bank's regional survey that expect CPI inflation to exceed 3 per cent on average over the next two years has fallen to 4 per cent in the most recent survey, compared with 26 per cent in the survey conducted near the start of 2003.
While the average private sector forecast for total CPI inflation in 2004 has edged down to 1.7 per cent, typical forecasts of longer-term inflation continue to be very close to 2 per cent.
As well, the yield differential between 30-year conventional and Real Return bonds has, on balance, remained close to 2 per cent.
The impact of earlier large increases in insurance premiums on core inflation is expected to continue diminishing into early 2004.
Indeed, there is a strong possibility that auto insurance premiums will decrease markedly in a number of provinces in coming months, reflecting either legislated or proposed provincial government initiatives.
Price discounting in industries adversely affected by SARS should diminish in coming months as activity returns to more normal levels.
Similarly, price discounting of goods should also diminish as retailers complete their inventory adjustment.
The effect is expected to be larger on total CPI inflation than on the core rate and is expected to be in the nature of a one-off price-level movement.
Nevertheless, with labour-productivity growth likely to resume over this period, growth in unit labour costs is expected to move down somewhat below 2 per cent through 2004.
Growth in the narrow monetary aggregates - gross M1, M1+, M1++ - has picked up appreciably since the last Report, following a temporary but pronounced slowdown earlier this year.
This reflects a return in the demand for money from abnormally weak levels to levels that are consistent with the current low interest rate environment.
Earlier this year, both households and firms were drawing down the precautionary balances amassed in 2002 in the face of weak equity prices, increasing financial turbulence, and rising geopolitical uncertainty.
Households continue to redistribute their investment portfolios, shifting from holdings of money-market and equity-based mutual funds towards fixed-term deposits and fixed-income mutual funds.
The shift out of financial holdings and into real assets is also continuing, evidenced by the strength of the housing market over the last year.
Despite this development, the growth rate of M2++ has picked up somewhat since the last Report, owing largely to the faster growth of the narrow money aggregates.
With growth in M2++ firming, one downside risk to the inflation outlook has lessened.
The amount of slack in the economy should be a source of some downward pressure on inflation over the projection horizon.
The effect on core inflation of the earlier hikes in insurance premiums should continue to diminish.
And the earlier substantial appreciation of the Canadian dollar should continue to put downward pressure on the core rate over the remainder of 2003 and through 2004.
On the other hand, the recent price discounting in a number of industries (e.g., tourism-related) and retail sectors is likely to moderate in coming months, as activity in these industries and retail inventories return to more normal levels.
On balance, the core rate of inflation is expected to be just over 1.5 per cent over the remainder of 2003.
As the effects of earlier large increases in insurance premiums fully dissipate, core inflation is projected to fall to just above 1 per cent in early 2004, before moving back towards the 2 per cent target.
Core inflation is expected to return to 2 per cent by mid-2005.
The downward pressure on inflation arising from slack in the economy should diminish as this slack is gradually absorbed through 2004.
Core inflation could be somewhat lower than projected over the next several quarters if some of the increases in auto insurance premiums are reversed.
Indeed, if all the changes that have been publicly discussed were implemented soon, the core rate projected between the fourth quarter of 2003 and the third quarter of 2004 would be lower than in the base-case scenario shown in Table 1, by 0.2 to 0.3 percentage points.
It should be noted that there is considerable uncertainty regarding the timing and magnitude of these possible reversals.
These effects are essentially one-off shocks and, if seen as such, should have little effect on inflation expectations and the outlook for inflation in 2005.
Developments in the markets for crude oil will continue to have an important impact on the outlook for the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI.
On the assumption that oil prices will ease to about US$27 per barrel next year and remain there in 2005, total CPI inflation is projected to fall below core inflation in 2004 and to return to 2 per cent by mid-2005.
Since the October Monetary Policy Report, three developments have led the Bank of Canada to modify its outlook for economic growth and inflation in Canada.
First, economic activity in the rest of the world, especially in the United States, has been stronger than expected.
Second, the US dollar has continued its sharp depreciation against major world currencies, including the Canadian dollar, largely as a result of global economic imbalances.
Third, downward revisions to Canadian GDP data in the first half of 2003 and lower-than-expected growth in the third and fourth quarters mean that the amount of economic slack was somewhat larger at the end of 2003 than projected by the Bank in its October Report.
Weighing these developments and their likely persistence, the Bank lowered its projection for output over the next year and a half and concluded that additional monetary stimulus would be required to support aggregate demand and return inflation to 2 per cent over the medium term.
Thus, on 20 January, the Bank lowered its target for the overnight interest rate by 25 basis points to 2.5 per cent.
But risks remain.
The main uncertainties for the Canadian economic outlook relate to the adjustment to global changes.
These include a stronger world economy, higher commodity prices, and the realignment of world currencies, including the Canadian dollar.
In this context, the role of monetary policy is to support aggregate demand sufficient to eliminate the output gap, so as to return inflation to its target over a two-year horizon.
A global economic recovery, led by the United States, appears to be well underway and is proceeding at a somewhat stronger pace than was expected.
Canada's real GDP, after edging down in the second quarter of 2003, grew at an annual rate of only 1.1 per cent in the third quarter - a weaker result than projected in the last Report.
Recent indicators for spending and activity point to a strengthening in the pace of economic expansion in the fourth quarter, with growth at about 4 per cent - a rate above that of potential.
The modest rate of growth in the third quarter largely reflected a sharp inventory correction by manufacturers and retailers.
Economic activity was also adversely affected by the August blackout in Ontario and by the closure of international borders to imports of Canadian cattle, beef, and related products after the discovery of one case of bovine spongiform encephalopathy in May.
The completion of the inventory correction, together with the recovery from these unusual shocks, contributed importantly to the estimated rebound in growth in the fourth quarter.
More generally, various aspects of the current climate, including robust employment gains and favourable financial conditions, suggest that stronger, more sustainable economic growth resumed in the fourth quarter of 2003.
Against this backdrop, the Canadian dollar has appreciated further against the US dollar since last October, touching a ten-year high of 78.84 cents and averaging 76.5 cents over the period.
On a trade-weighted basis, the movement has been somewhat less, given the relatively large depreciation of the US dollar against overseas currencies.
Of note, the Canadian dollar has depreciated 4.5 per cent against the euro over the last three months.
Overall, the stronger Canadian dollar appears to have begun to cut into the pace of economic activity in terms of weaker-than-expected export growth and signs of greater import penetration in the fourth quarter.
The Bank's conventional measures of potential output and the output gap indicate that the level of economic activity fell below full capacity in the second and third quarters of 2003.
And, while the amount of economic slack probably decreased somewhat in the fourth quarter, significant excess supply remains.
Based on an analysis of all the indicators of capacity pressures, the size of the output gap is judged to be slightly larger than the conventional measure suggests.
Even with a lower level of output and a strong Canadian dollar, core inflation (at 1.8 per cent in November) was slightly higher than projected in our October Report and up somewhat since August.
The positive surprise in the core rate mainly reflected less price discounting of automobiles and clothing than expected; it should be temporary.
Core CPI inflation is likely to continue to exhibit some near-term volatility - rising in December before falling in the first quarter of 2004.
These movements will mainly reflect the effects of special factors a year ago.
If one looks through these influences, however, underlying price pressures and the presence of unutilized capacity suggest a core rate of inflation below current levels.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was 1.6 per cent in November, down from 2.0 per cent in August.
This decrease in total CPI inflation was chiefly due to reductions in the consumer prices of gasoline and fuel oil from their levels a year earlier.
The stronger Canadian dollar largely reflects a response to global economic and financial forces.
These include not only elements reflecting stronger world demand, such as higher world commodity prices, but also the adjustments associated with redressing global economic imbalances.
The stronger dollar means that the Canadian economy will be relying less on net exports and more on domestic demand.
This will require shifts in activity among sectors and changes on the part of many businesses.
The Bank's recent regional survey suggests that these changes are underway.
In particular, it indicates that firms affected by the appreciation have made plans to adjust - for example, by installing new machinery and equipment.
Canadian monetary policy facilitates the overall adjustment process by helping to sustain aggregate demand.
The global economic expansion is expected to strengthen over the next year or so, although economic imbalances still create uncertainty about its sustainability.
Growth in US real GDP is projected to remain above the economy's growth potential in 2004, supported by stimulative policies and the depreciation of the US dollar.
Strengthening capital spending by businesses, combined with a considerable contribution from inventory investment, should underpin the expansion in activity.
The Bank expects that US economic activity will increase by about 4 1/2 per cent in 2004, on an average annual basis, which is somewhat stronger than was projected in the October Report.
And, while prospects for sustained US economic growth are clouded by the accumulation of fiscal and external imbalances, US output growth is projected to remain above that of potential in 2005.
In the euro area, a gradual pickup in economic momentum is projected, while conditions in Japan should continue to improve, largely because of exports to the rest of Asia, especially China.
Strong growth in emerging Asian markets should also continue to support US-dollar prices for many commodities.
In Canada, economic growth in the period ahead will come primarily from private domestic demand, supported by monetary stimulus and by strong business confidence.
Growth in household spending should also be underpinned by rising employment and incomes.
A stronger global economy, the reduced cost of machinery and equipment resulting from the higher Canadian dollar, and ready access to capital markets should stimulate stronger business investment.
Exports should receive some support from rising US and global economic activity, notwithstanding a marked reduction, since 2001, in the US propensity to import.
However, the lower value of the US dollar is expected to put continuing downward pressure on Canadian exports over the course of 2004.
The Bank's base-case projection now calls for real GDP growth in Canada to average about 2.75 per cent in 2004 (compared with 1.6 per cent in 2003), and to pick up to about 3.75 per cent in 2005.
The Bank's projection assumes growth of about 3 per cent, at an annual rate, in the first half of 2004, moving to 3 - 3.5 per cent in the second half and peaking around 4 per cent in the first half of 2005.
This would imply that the output gap would not change materially before the end of 2004, but would be substantially closed by the third quarter of 2005.
Core inflation is projected to fall below 1.5 per cent in early 2004 (as the effect of past substantial increases in auto insurance premiums rapidly diminishes) before gradually moving back towards the 2 per cent target by the end of 2005.
The slack in product and labour markets should keep inflation below longer-run inflation expectations over the next year and a half.
But this effect should disappear as the output gap closes.
The appreciation of the Canadian dollar over the last year is likely to continue to temper the rise in consumer prices through 2004.
However, the extent of the pass-through of exchange rate movements to consumer prices is expected to be limited, based on the experience here in Canada and in other countries with low and stable inflation.
The outlook for the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI continues to be importantly affected by developments in the markets for crude oil.
If oil prices ease to about US$30 per barrel in the second half of 2004 and US$28 in 2005, as suggested by forward contracts, total CPI inflation should remain below core inflation through 2005.
The Canadian economy continues to adjust to developments in the global economy.
These include stronger world demand, higher commodity prices, the realignment of world currencies - including the Canadian dollar - and the intensified competition, together with new trading opportunities, coming from emerging-market economies, such as China and India.
These developments require shifts in activity among sectors and create a need for adjustments by many businesses.
Monetary policy is facilitating these adjustments by supporting aggregate demand, with the goal of keeping the economy near its full potential and inflation on target.
At the end of 2003, the Canadian economy was operating at a lower level than the Bank had projected in the October Monetary Policy Report.
Although growth rebounded in the fourth quarter of last year, real GDP growth in the third quarter was weaker than had been expected, and there was a downward revision to GDP in the second quarter.
This came about despite stronger global economic activity, particularly in the United States but also in Japan and other Asian economies, and strong increases in commodity prices.
Preliminary indications are that growth in the first quarter of 2004 was marginally below 3 per cent at annual rates.
As expected, core inflation has generally been below the Bank's 2 per cent target since the October Report.
Against this backdrop, the Bank lowered its key policy rate by a total of 75 basis points, reducing it by 25 basis points on each of the last three fixed announcement dates, to bring it to 2 per cent.
The Bank's outlook for economic growth and inflation in Canada is essentially unchanged from that of the January Monetary Policy Report Update.
The Canadian economy is expected to grow at an annualized rate of about 2.75 per cent in 2004, picking up to about 3.75 per cent in 2005.
Such growth would return the economy close to its production potential by the third quarter of next year.
Core inflation is expected to average about 1.5 per cent for the rest of 2004 and to move back to the 2 per cent target by the end of next year.
The main uncertainty for the outlook continues to relate to how the Canadian economy adjusts to global developments.
Overall, the risks to the outlook appear balanced.
The core rate of inflation fell in early 2004, and in February was well below the Bank's 2 per cent inflation-control target.
The rate of increase in the total CPI came down even more, reflecting reductions in the prices of gasoline and fuel oil from year-earlier levels.
As expected at the time of the October Report, core CPI inflation fell in early 2004, as the effects of special factors came to an end.
Between August and December of 2003, the core rate averaged 1.8 per cent, and by February it had decreased to 1.1 per cent.
Other measures of the trend rate of inflation that the Bank follows closely have also fallen and in February were close to the core rate.
A temporary jump in the core rate in December 2003 was the result of Ontario electricity rebates at the end of 2002.
In January and February of 2004, the core rate of inflation moved lower, since the effects from some special factors had, for the most part, ended.
In particular, the effect of past substantial increases in auto insurance premiums, which had boosted the year-over-year rate of increase in the core CPI for some time, diminished significantly.
The rate of increase in the food component of the core CPI also came down early this year, partly reflecting the impact of the Canadian dollar's appreciation since early 2003.
Core inflation is expected to settle around 1.5 per cent in the second quarter of 2004.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was 0.7 per cent in February, down from 2.0 per cent in August.
This drop relative to the core rate was chiefly due to reductions in the consumer prices of gasoline and fuel oil from their levels a year earlier, as well as a marked easing in the year-to-year increase in the consumer price of natural gas.
The price of crude oil has strengthened considerably since mid-October, however, reflecting strong Asian demand and the impact of relatively severe winter weather conditions on North American stocks.
As a result, the price of oil is currently well above that in the base-case assumption used in the last Report.
Canada's real GDP grew at an annual rate of 1.3 per cent in the third quarter of 2003, somewhat less than had been expected in the October Report.
In the fourth quarter, economic growth picked up to an annual rate of 3.8 per cent, about the same as anticipated in the last Report and in the January Update, although final domestic demand was slightly weaker than expected and external demand was slightly stronger.
Recent indicators for spending and activity suggest that economic growth will be about 2.75 per cent in the first quarter of 2004, marginally weaker than anticipated in the January Update.
Growth in the third quarter of 2003 was held back as manufacturers and retailers undertook sharp inventory corrections.
Economic activity was also adversely affected by the August blackout in Ontario and by the closure of international borders to imports of Canadian cattle, beef, and related products after the discovery of one case of bovine spongiform encephalopathy last May.
At the same time, final domestic demand rose strongly.
Business investment surged, and household spending rose substantially, reflecting continuing monetary stimulus, a high level of consumer confidence, and the effects of price discounting.
A pickup in inventory investment, together with some recovery from the earlier unusual shocks, contributed importantly to the resurgence in growth towards year-end.
Exports also rebounded in the fourth quarter of 2003 as a result of the strengthening global economic recovery.
However, imports increased even more strongly, and growth in final domestic demand slowed from its rapid pace in the third quarter.
In the United States, an upswing in household spending on housing and consumption and in business spending on equipment and software led to strong growth of real GDP in the second half of 2003 (8.2 and 4.1 per cent in the third and fourth quarters, respectively).
Based on preliminary information, additional household spending, strong business expenditures, and significant restocking of inventories should result in growth of about 4.5 per cent in the first quarter of 2004.
Among the key global developments affecting the Canadian economy in 2003 and early 2004 has been the marked realignment of world currencies, including the Canadian dollar.
At the same time, there has been a significant strengthening in the pace of global economic growth, especially in the United States and in most Asian economies, and a rebound in world commodity prices.
The growing presence of China and India on the global scene is also a factor at play.
The implications of these global changes for the demand for Canadian products will require shifts in activity among sectors and significant adjustments by many firms.
The rise in the Canadian dollar implies that economic growth in Canada will rely largely on domestic demand.
Indeed, economic activity in the last quarter of 2003 and in early 2004 appears to have been held back by the impact of the Canadian dollar's appreciation on real net exports.
In addition, there are likely to be shifts in activity towards the export of commodities and away from the export of highly manufactured products.
Moreover, some Canadian exporters are likely to shift towards markets in countries whose currencies have appreciated significantly in relation to the US dollar.
The reduction in the cost of machinery and equipment imported from the United States should help boost capital spending and improve Canadian productivity.
Finally, firms will develop new supply chains and new niches for their own products and services in response to changing global markets.
Some of the economic adjustments in Canada caused by the key global changes became evident in 2003, although most of these shifts in activity across sectors are still to come.
While overall corporate profitability remained high through 2003, profits have tended to weaken in those sectors with high exposure to international competition.
Output growth was also stronger, and employment tended to rise, on average, in those industries producing commodities or having low exposure to foreign competition.
The Bank's most recent industry survey, completed in March, provides further evidence that changes in response to global developments have begun.
Firms seemed somewhat more confident in their ability to adjust to the appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
Many adversely affected firms have initiated measures to alleviate the impact of the higher dollar, chiefly through cost-cutting measures and improvements to productivity.
In contrast, businesses favourably affected by the higher value of the dollar (mainly through lower costs for imported inputs) have responded, in some cases, by reducing their selling prices in Canada, although many used the opportunity to improve their profit margins.
Companies that were adversely affected by the rise in the Canadian dollar were generally as optimistic as other firms regarding prospects for improved sales growth, but were markedly less sanguine about their hiring and investment intentions.
Estimates of the Bank's conventional measures of potential output and the output gap suggest that the level of economic activity has been below potential since the second quarter of 2003.
While the output gap decreased somewhat in the fourth quarter, significant excess supply remains.
With a downward revision to Canadian GDP data in the second quarter of 2003 and lower-than-expected growth in the second half of that year, the estimated output gap at year-end was somewhat larger than projected in the last Report.
Several indicators are consistent with the view that economic slack has opened up since early 2003.
In the most recent survey conducted by the Bank's regional offices, the proportion of firms reporting pressures on capacity has decreased relative to indications at the beginning of 2003.
As well, core inflation has moved below the 2 per cent target.
On the other hand, capacity utilization in the non-farm, goods-producing sector in the fourth quarter of 2003 was, on balance, largely unchanged from levels early in the year, and about the same as its 2000-2003 average.
Based on an analysis of all the indicators of capacity pressures, the Bank judges that there is currently more excess supply in the Canadian economy than indicated by its conventional measure.
However, there is more uncertainty than usual around estimates of the output gap, because it is harder to pin down effective capacity in times of demand-driven shifts in sectoral activity.
Unit labour costs in the business sector in the fourth quarter of 2003 were virtually unchanged from year-earlier levels, even though there was only a small rise in productivity over the past year.
This weakness in the rate of increase of compensation was particularly pronounced in sectors adversely affected by the series of unusual shocks that hit the Canadian economy in 2003 and is therefore likely to prove temporary.
Indeed, the underlying rate of increase in wages, based on such measures as the average hourly earnings of permanent workers, seems to have moved up to about 2.75 per cent since mid-2003.
The substantial year-over-year increases in the global prices of Canada's commodity exports during 2003 pushed the annual rise in the chain price index for GDP (a broad price measure of the goods and services produced in Canada) above the core rate of inflation last year.
The prices of non-energy commodities have risen further since the end of 2003.
Stock markets have strengthened further, corporate bond spreads are narrower, and the yield curve has shifted down.
Credit demand by non-financial businesses picked up in the past few months but remains modest, since growth in earnings has allowed businesses to finance most of their investment needs with internal funds.
Longer-term business credit, buoyed by the strong issuance of bonds and the income-trust component of equities, has grown at a solid pace, but short-term credit remains below levels of a year ago.
Household credit is still expanding at a rapid pace, reflecting consumer spending and activity in the housing market.
Low interest rates have held debt-service ratios at low levels, and rising house prices have supported household balance sheets.
This suggests that household finances should not be a drag on economic growth in the period ahead.
The yield curve in Canada has shifted down since the October Report.
At shorter maturities, this movement reflected both the actual and anticipated lowering of policy rates.
Yield spreads between Canadian and US bonds at shorter maturities narrowed sharply in the period between October and February, as interest rates fell in Canada while yields on US Treasuries remained fairly stable.
This narrowing in spreads was particularly pronounced for 2-year maturities.
The period from October to January saw broad-based weakness in the US dollar relative to most currencies.
In this context, the Canadian dollar touched a 10-year high of 78.86 cents US in early January.
Since then, many currencies, including the Canadian dollar, have traded in fairly wide but more stable ranges.
The Canadian dollar traded in a range of 74.5 to 76.5 cents US, similar to the level at the time of the October Report.
The recovery in global economic activity is broadening and gaining momentum.
This recovery is strongly supported by expansionary fiscal and monetary policies in many countries.
Indeed, the contribution of China and newly industrialized Asian economies to projected world economic growth is larger than that of the United States.
Short-term prospects for strong growth in the United States have improved.
The Bank expects to see growth of about 5 per cent in 2004 and 4.5 per cent in 2005.
The main drivers of US growth will be robust investment and consumer spending.
Firms are expected to plow back their profits to meet anticipated demand and replenish their inventories.
And households will benefit from tax rebates and projected employment gains.
However, should they persist, high oil prices would dampen US growth prospects over the next two years.
Although much remains to be done in terms of economic and financial reform, a sustained recovery in Japan may be in progress boosted by strong exports and investment.
While prospects appear to be improving in the euro area, the near-term outlook remains subdued.
In contrast, the U.K.  economy is operating at close to full capacity.
While the short-term outlook is clearly more positive, risks and uncertainties remain as we look further out.
It is unclear, for example, whether the large fiscal and current account imbalances in many major economies will be resolved in a way that maintains growth.
The expected strong economic expansion, especially in various Asian economies, should continue to support the price of non-energy commodities over the remainder of 2004 and through 2005.
With regard to crude oil, the Bank's base-case scenario assumes that prices will ease to about US$32 per barrel by the middle of this year and remain there through mid-2005.
Natural gas prices are expected to stay near their current high levels throughout 2004.
These assumptions, based on current futures prices, are significantly above the levels of six months ago.
Economic growth in Canada in 2004 and 2005 is expected to come primarily from private domestic demand, supported by the degree of monetary stimulus and high levels of business and consumer confidence.
The expanding global economy and the resulting high level of commodity prices, the contribution of the higher Canadian dollar to reduced costs of imported machinery and equipment, and favourable financial conditions should all lead to robust growth in capital expenditures by businesses.
And, despite some softening towards the end of 2003, household spending is still expected to grow solidly, with additional support from projected stronger gains in real incomes.
Spending on goods and services by all levels of government is projected to rise moderately during this period.
Canadian exports are expected to receive continued support from further strong gains in US and global economic activity.
Nonetheless, the lower value of the US dollar is expected to hold back the growth of Canada's exports and boost imports.
Indeed, net exports are not expected to contribute to growth in 2004 and 2005.
The Bank's base-case outlook now projects real GDP growth, on an average annual basis, of about 2.75 per cent in 2004, picking up to about 3.75 per cent in 2005.
While lower than that given in the October Report, the projection for 2004 is the same as that in the January Update.
This projection for 2004 is also very close to the most recent average private sector forecast, while the Bank's growth projection for 2005 is slightly higher than the latest consensus outlook.
The Bank's projection assumes real GDP growth of about 2.75 per cent, at an annual rate, in the first half of 2004.
This is expected to move up to about 3.5 per cent in the second half of this year and to peak around 4 per cent in the first half of 2005.
This outlook for growth would imply little change in the output gap by the end of 2004, but by the third quarter of 2005 the economy should be operating near potential.
Most indicators of inflation expectations that the Bank follows have remained largely unchanged since mid-October, and many of the key medium - and longer-term measures remain close to 2 per cent.
In the Conference Board of Canada's regular survey, reported in the winter issue of Index of Business Confidence, 84 per cent of respondents expected prices, in general, to rise over the next six months at a rate of 2 per cent or less, little changed from last autumn.
As well, almost all firms in the Bank's latest regional survey expected CPI inflation to be within a range of 1 to 3 per cent, on average, over the next two years.
Although the average private sector forecast for total CPI inflation in 2004 has edged down further to 1.4 per cent, the inflation forecast for 2005 is just under 2 per cent.
Typical forecasts of longer-term inflation also remain very close to 2 per cent.
Growth in the narrow money aggregates - M1+, M1++ - has strengthened since the last Report, partly in response to the low interest rate environment.
This is consistent with the near-term outlook and with the recent pickup in output growth.
The growth rate of the broad money aggregate, M2++, has risen somewhat since the last Report from relatively low levels.
This upswing largely reflects the strong growth in narrow money.
Also contributing was a shift back into equity-based mutual funds from other assets, reversing the trend of the past few months.
Despite this recent pickup, continued weak growth in M2++ points to a downside risk for inflation.
The slack in product and labour markets is expected to keep inflation below longer-term expectations until mid-2005.
This effect should gradually diminish, however, as the output gap closes.
The rise in the Canadian dollar since early 2003 is also likely to continue to put a limited amount of downward pressure on the core rate over the remainder of 2004.
The core rate of inflation is expected to stay around 1 1/2 per cent through 2004, before gradually moving back to the 2 per cent target by the end of 2005.
The outlook for the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI is critically affected by developments in the markets for crude oil.
With the substantial rise in the price of crude oil in recent months, total CPI inflation is expected to move somewhat above the core rate of inflation in the second quarter of 2004.
If the WTI price of oil eases to about US$32 per barrel by mid-2004 and to US$30 per barrel by the second half of 2005, as suggested by futures prices, total CPI inflation should fall slightly below core inflation in 2005.
Since the April Monetary Policy Report, three developments have led the Bank of Canada to make small modifications to its outlook for economic growth and inflation in Canada.
First, economic growth in the first half of 2004 is now estimated to be somewhat higher than projected in April because of stronger foreign and final domestic demand for Canadian products.
This, combined with a small upward revision to GDP data for 2003, implies somewhat less excess supply at mid-year than had been anticipated.
Second, world oil prices have been higher than expected.
This has led the Bank to raise its projection for total CPI inflation over the next few quarters, but is not expected to have any significant effect on the path of core inflation.
While higher oil prices will tend to dampen growth in the United States and the major overseas economies relative to earlier projections, the overall growth of output in Canada is unlikely to be appreciably affected.
Third, recent indicators point to some slowing in economic growth in the United States for reasons other than the effect of higher oil prices.
When all of these factors are taken into account, the Bank expects economic growth in Canada to be about 2.75 per cent in 2004, on an average annual basis - unchanged from the April Report - and 3.5 per cent in 2005 - slightly lower than in the April Report.
On a fourth-quarter-to-fourth-quarter basis, the Bank's projection calls for growth of about 3.5 per cent in 2004 - higher than expected in April owing to a stronger first half - and 3.25 per cent in 2005 - lower than projected in April.
This outlook implies that the output gap would close by mid-2005, with core inflation moving back up to 2 per cent by the end of 2005.
Against this background, the Bank held its target overnight rate unchanged at 2 per cent on 20 July.
Experience tells us, however, that as economies approach their production capacity, monetary stimulus must be removed to avoid a buildup of inflation pressures.
Indeed, market interest rates, in Canada and elsewhere, incorporate expectations of such adjustment to policy interest rates.
The timing and magnitude of rate increases will clearly vary according to each country's economic circumstances.
In Canada, the withdrawal of monetary stimulus will depend on the evolving prospects for inflation and for pressures on capacity.
Three factors will play a particularly important role in this respect.
The first is the assessment of the size of the output gap.
The second is the future growth of Canadian exports and imports, which is particularly uncertain because of the ongoing adjustments to global changes and the recent patterns in trade growth.
The third is the overall effect on the Canadian economy of current and future movements in the world prices of oil and non-energy commodities.
In addition to these three factors, there continue to be heightened geopolitical concerns.
The global economic recovery is advancing, with strong growth in the United States, Japan, and the emerging Asian economies - especially China - in the first quarter of 2004.
Although growth in Canada's real GDP slowed to 2.4 per cent in the first quarter of 2004 as a result of a marked inventory correction, it is expected to have strengthened to about 4 per cent in the second quarter.
Thus, economic growth in the first half of this year is estimated to be around 3.25 per cent, somewhat higher than projected in the April Report, with increases in both final domestic demand and exports being stronger than anticipated.
Combined with a small upward revision to Canadian real GDP data for 2003, this outlook implies a somewhat smaller output gap at mid-year than was projected in the last Report.
While recognizing that there is a wide confidence interval around any estimate of the output gap, the Bank judges that its conventional measure provides a balanced assessment of excess supply.
Product market indicators suggest greater pressure on capacity.
For example, in the Bank's latest Business Outlook Survey, the proportion of firms reporting pressures on capacity rose above the 2000-2003 average.
On the other hand, some labour market indicators point to less pressure on capacity.
Hours worked are below trend, and wage increases remain moderate.
Core inflation moved up from 1.1 per cent in February to 1.7 per cent in June.
This is higher than projected in the last Report, owing partly to unanticipated delays in reductions to auto insurance premiums and larger-than-expected increases in prices for motor vehicles and meat.
At the same time, unexpectedly high prices for crude oil, together with unusually tight conditions in North American gasoline markets, led to a sharp rise in total CPI inflation.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was 2.5 per cent in June, up from 0.7 per cent in February.
Canadian producers continue to adjust to developments in the global economy - substantially stronger world demand, higher commodity prices, and the realignment of the US dollar against most major currencies, including the Canadian dollar.
After rising to a 10-year peak of 78.85 cents against the US dollar in January, the Canadian dollar moved down to a low of 71.41 cents US in mid-May.
Since early June, the dollar has generally been trading in a range between 73.5 cents US and 76.5 cents US.
These developments, and their implications for the demand for Canadian goods and services, are leading to shifts in activity and employment among sectors and to major adjustments by many firms.
In particular, many firms in industries with a high exposure to international trade have focused on improving productivity and reducing costs.
Between December 2003 and April 2004, output growth in Canada continued to be particularly strong in sectors with a low exposure to foreign competition.
In recent months, however, exports have also surged.
It thus seems likely that even industries highly exposed to international trade could see significant increases in their output over the near term, owing to robust global economic growth.
Indeed, the Bank's latest Business Outlook Survey suggests that firms are now more confident about sales prospects over the next 12 months, both domestically and abroad.
However, the adjustment to developments in the global economy is not completed.
Moreover, it has been unusually difficult recently to explain the movements in the volumes of both exports and imports in terms of their underlying fundamentals.
At mid-2003, the levels of both exports and imports appeared to be well below what their historical relationships with real income and relative prices would have suggested.
Since then, exports seem to have regained lost ground, while imports have recouped only a small portion.
These puzzling developments, together with the substantial revisions to these data, make it difficult to predict the future contribution of net exports to GDP growth.
Recent data point to some slowing of growth in the United States.
In its base-case outlook, the Bank now expects US real GDP to grow by about 4.5 per cent in 2004 and 4.25 per cent in 2005.
Although lower than projected in the April Report, this still represents a solid performance led by robust business and consumer spending.
While near-term prospects are improving in the euro-zone countries, the risk of slightly weaker growth over the next two years relative to that assumed in the April Report has increased.
In Japan, however, prospects for a sustained recovery are now firmer.
Asia's strengthening economies will continue to support the global economic upswing, so long as China manages a smooth return to a path of sustainable growth.
Consistent with the global growth profile and the expectations of financial markets, this projection also assumes rising international interest rates to moderate inflation pressures as output levels in various countries approach production capacity.
In the past several months, world oil prices have been significantly higher than expected, reflecting strong global demand for oil and heightened tensions in the Middle East.
The Bank's projection assumes that the West Texas Intermediate price will average about US$38 per barrel in the second half of 2004 (about US$6 more than assumed in the last Report), before easing to US$35 per barrel by the second half of next year.
In Canada, economic growth through to the end of 2005 is expected to come primarily from domestic demand.
While strong foreign demand implies further gains in exports, despite the ongoing dampening influence of the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar, this is likely to be more than offset by faster growth in imports.
Solid growth in consumer spending should be sustained by advances in real incomes.
Housing expenditures are projected to slow down, however, following a period of intense activity.
Business investment should continue to benefit from strong global growth, high commodity prices, favourable financial conditions, and lower prices for imported machinery and equipment.
The projection assumes that governments will maintain fiscal balance by keeping growth in spending in line with growth in revenues.
The higher world oil prices assumed in this outlook will tend to reduce demand for Canadian exports and increase production costs for Canadian firms.
But they should also lead to some increase in output and capital spending by energy-producing companies.
Hence, the net effect on Canadian GDP is expected to be close to zero.
The Bank's base-case projection calls for real GDP growth in Canada to average about 3.5 per cent in both the second half of 2004 and the first half of 2005, before easing to 3 per cent (the estimated rate of growth of potential output) in the second half.
In terms of annual averages, this implies GDP growth of about 2.75 per cent in 2004 and 3.5 per cent in 2005.
The growth projection for 2005 is lower than that in the April Report, owing partly to the weaker US outlook and partly to an anticipated slowing in household expenditures on durables and housing following their recent rapid expansion.
With this growth profile, the Canadian economy is now expected to reach its production potential by mid-2005.
The Bank's near-term outlook for core inflation is little changed from the April Report, since the recent surprises to core inflation are largely attributed to temporary influences.
Core inflation is projected to remain just above 1.5 per cent for the rest of 2004, before gradually moving up to the 2 per cent target by the end of 2005.
The presence of excess supply until mid-2005 should keep core inflation below longer-run inflation expectations of 2 per cent through to the end of 2005.
The earlier appreciation of the Canadian dollar is also expected to continue to exert a small amount of downward pressure on core inflation over the remainder of 2004.
The outlook for the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI will continue to be crucially affected by developments in the markets for crude oil.
Given the outlook for the WTI price of oil, total CPI inflation is likely to remain above 2 per cent for the rest of this year, before falling slightly below core inflation in the second half of 2005.
The Canadian economy continues to adjust to major global developments.
These include a marked recovery in world economic growth and an associated increase in commodity prices; the growing global presence of major emerging-market economies such as China and India; and a realignment of world currencies, including the Canadian dollar.
Canadian monetary policy is facilitating the adjustment by aiming to keep inflation at its 2 per cent target and the economy operating near its production capacity.
Early in the year, with core inflation below target and excess supply in the economy, the Bank lowered its target for the overnight interest rate to 2 per cent to support growth in domestic demand.
Given the appreciation of the Canadian dollar in 2003, the Bank did not expect net exports (the difference between exports and imports) to make a material contribution to growth in aggregate demand in 2004 and 2005.
But, in fact, in the first half of this year, exports grew much more vigorously than anticipated.
As a result, the Canadian economy has moved up near its production capacity sooner than was projected in either the April Monetary Policy Report or the July Update.
Recent developments have reinforced the continuing need for economic adjustments in Canada.
Largely reflecting the strength of global demand, world oil prices have risen well above the Bank's earlier assumptions.
The prices of non-energy commodities are at high levels, and the Canadian dollar has strengthened further, which places additional pressure on some sectors that are highly exposed to international trade.
Over the period to the end of 2006, the Bank's base-case projection is for aggregate demand for Canadian goods and services to expand, on average, at about the same rate as potential output, which is estimated at 3 per cent.
Given the effects of higher oil prices and the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar, the Bank projects growth to be slightly less than 3 per cent in 2005 and slightly more than 3 per cent in 2006.
With the economy expected to remain near its production capacity throughout the projection period, core inflation is projected to move back up to 2 per cent by the end of 2005.
Against this background, the Bank moved to reduce the amount of monetary stimulus in the economy by raising its target for the overnight rate to 2.25 per cent on 8 September and to 2.50 per cent on 19 October.
Further reduction of monetary stimulus will be required over time to keep inflation on target, with the pace of interest rate increases depending on the Bank's continuing assessment of the prospects for factors that affect pressures on capacity and, hence, inflation.
The outlook for Canadian exports and imports is of particular significance in this respect, given the uncertainty associated with the ongoing adjustments to changes in the global economy, including changes in commodity prices and exchange rates.
The risks surrounding global economic prospects relate primarily to the evolution of oil prices, the pace of expansion in China, the way in which current account imbalances in the United States and East Asia will be resolved, and geopolitical developments.
Core CPI inflation averaged 1.5 per cent in the first eight months of 2004, below the Bank's 2 per cent inflation-control target.
At the same time, unexpectedly high prices for crude oil have contributed to a marked rise in the rate of increase in the total CPI.
The core rate of inflation was 1.5 per cent in August, up from 1.1 per cent last February.
Other measures of the trend rate of inflation that the Bank follows were also below the 2 per cent target.
The slack in product markets, which had been evident through most of 2003 and into early 2004, contributed to keeping the core rate of inflation below the 2 per cent target through the first eight months of this year.
The prices of import-intensive goods also continued to decline in the first eight months of 2004 as a result of further reductions in world prices for many consumer goods and the impact of the earlier rise in the Canadian dollar.
Despite some volatility in intervening months, the overall rise in the core rate between February and August was about as projected in both the April Report and the July Update.
With motor vehicle prices higher than expected, core inflation increased somewhat more than anticipated in the period from March to July.
But in August, the core rate of inflation moved back into line with expectations, following renewed discounting of automobile prices.
The 12-month rate of increase in consumer meat prices has also risen markedly in recent months, partly reflecting a reduced supply of chicken resulting from an outbreak of avian influenza in British Columbia's Fraser Valley.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was 1.9 per cent in August, up from 0.7 per cent in February.
This larger gain relative to the core rate was caused mainly by substantial increases in the consumer prices of gasoline and fuel oil from their levels a year earlier.
The price of crude oil has continued to rise since mid-April, reflecting strong global demand for oil and heightened concerns about the risks of supply disruptions in a number of oil producing regions.
Indeed, the price of oil is currently well above the levels in the base-case scenarios of both the April Report and the last Update.
In particular, the increase in exports was significantly stronger than expected.
Recent indicators for spending and activity suggest that economic growth was about 3 per cent in the third quarter of 2004, marginally less than anticipated in the July Update.
The broadly based surge in exports reflected continued strong growth in global economic activity, as well as a recovery from the unusually low level in mid-2003.
Capital expenditures by businesses also rose substantially.
Some of this increased demand was met by imports, although imports rose much less than exports.
Since part of the increase in sales was likely unexpected by firms, inventories were also reduced.
Growth in the US economy slowed to 3.3 per cent (at annual rates) in the second quarter of 2004 from 4.5 per cent in the first quarter, owing to weaker growth in consumption.
Higher oil prices were mainly responsible for dampening consumption, which is expected to rebound modestly in the third quarter.
Evidence to date indicates that growth rose to about 4.5 per cent in the third quarter.
Canadian producers continue to adjust to developments in the global economy.
These developments include a marked recovery in world economic growth; the associated increase in commodity prices; the growing global presence of major emerging-market economies, such as China and India; and large movements in the US dollar against most other major currencies, including the Canadian dollar.
The impact of these developments on the demand for Canadian goods and services is causing changes in the composition of activity, employment, and capital spending among the various sectors of the economy, as well as major adjustments by many firms.
Indeed, many companies in industries that are highly exposed to international competition are making significant modifications to their operations.
Between December 2003 and July 2004, output growth in Canada remained strong in those sectors with low exposure to international trade.
Over the same period, however, the strength of global demand for Canadian goods and services has also led to sharply higher output in a number of industries highly exposed to international competition.
Business capital spending and intentions have also been importantly affected by key global economic developments.
Indeed, the growth of business investment since 2002 has been concentrated in sectors with low exposure to international competition, as well as in industries producing energy and other commodities.
In the remaining industries that are highly exposed to international trade and, therefore, to exchange rate fluctuations, capital spending has fallen back, however.
The Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey suggested that, overall, the level of confidence among firms about sales prospects over the next 12 months remains about as high as it was in the summer survey, with firms in the West being significantly more optimistic than those in Central and Eastern Canada.
Firms in most sectors still plan to increase their investment expenditures, with manufacturing continuing to be an exception.
More generally, it appears that many Canadian firms are still adjusting to developments in the global economy.
Indeed, with continuing uncertainty attached to the outlook for global demand for Canadian goods and services, the likely path of world prices for energy and non-energy commodities, and the nature and extent of further changes in currencies, the size and timing of further adjustments by Canadian businesses remains uncertain.
This, combined with a small upward revision to real GDP data for 2003, suggests that the Canadian economy has moved up near its production potential somewhat more quickly than was expected in the last Report.
Indeed, the Bank's conventional measures of potential output and the output gap indicate that the level of economic activity was very close to full capacity by the second quarter of 2004.
While there continues to be a wide confidence interval surrounding any estimate of the output gap, the Bank believes that its conventional measure provides a balanced assessment of how close the economy is to its capacity limits.
This is confirmed by the proportion of firms reporting pressures on capacity in the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey.
Some indicators currently point to greater pressure on capacity than the conventional measure.
For instance, capacity utilization in the non-farm, goods-producing sector was well above the 2000-03 average.
As well, the number of companies adversely affected by labour shortages rose from the summer Business Outlook Survey.
These labour shortages were widespread in the resource, trucking, business and personal services, manufacturing, and construction sectors.
This last shortage is consistent with the capacity pressures that have been evident in the housing market for some time.
In contrast, other indicators suggest more slack than implied by the conventional measure of the output gap.
Hours worked have been below trend, and wage increases continue to be moderate.
The ratio of unfilled orders to shipments in the manufacturing sector (excluding aerospace products and parts) also remains quite low.
There are differences in capacity utilization across industries and regions, and some of these differences may well become more pronounced in the future as a result of the ongoing adjustment process to global changes.
However, there is currently little excess supply in the Canadian economy as a whole.
Unit labour costs in the business sector in the second quarter of 2004 were up modestly from year-earlier levels, even though productivity increased only slightly over the past year.
This reflected the fact that hourly labour compensation in the business sector rose by a mere 1 per cent between the second quarter of 2003 and the second quarter of 2004.
However, the underlying rate of increase in wages, based on such measures as the average hourly earnings of permanent workers, seems to have been in a range between 2.25 and 3.25 per cent since the fourth quarter of 2003.
Further large year-over-year increases in the prices of Canada's commodity exports during the first half of 2004, resulting from strong growth in the world economy, contributed importantly to the pronounced increase in the annual rise in the chain price index for GDP (a broad price measure of goods and services produced in Canada) between the fourth quarter of 2003 and the second quarter of 2004.
However, the prices of non-energy commodities have edged down slightly since mid-2004.
Upward revisions to forecasts for US crop production contributed to a decline in grain prices, and the prices of forest products have also eased as a result of somewhat weaker demand.
Financial conditions in Canada have been very favourable since the April Report.
The yields and spreads on corporate bonds are broadly unchanged and remain below their historical averages, as strong profitability offsets concerns about the possible impact of higher interest rates in the future.
Canadian equity markets have moved higher since the time of the last Report, and remain well above the levels seen a year ago.
The solid earnings performance of Canadian banks, together with increased competition among financial institutions and between financial institutions and capital markets for business lending, has contributed to easier bank-lending conditions.
Favourable financial conditions and ongoing improvements in business balance sheets have led to a strengthening of total business credit growth, which is approaching a level in line with its historical averages.
There has been a particularly brisk pickup in short-term business credit over the past few months - largely in the form of loans from chartered banks.
This increase was due to lower borrowing costs, easier terms and conditions, and a slight increase in the demand for credit.
Long-term business credit continued to grow solidly, supported by healthy issuance of bonds and equities in capital markets.
However, most of the increase in business credit seems to have been directed towards general business operations rather than increased investment.
Household credit advanced at an accelerated pace, with both consumer credit and residential mortgage credit contributing to the rise.
This pickup suggests that low interest rates and solid income growth are still bolstering consumption and housing investment.
Yields on shorter-term bonds in both Canada and the United States have risen since the last Report, driven by higher policy rates and expectations of further increases.
Yields on longer-term bonds, in contrast, have shifted down slightly.
Furthermore, bond yields are generally well below the peaks reached in May and June of this year.
The early summer peak in yields reflected both the perceived beginning of the tightening phase in the US interest rate cycle and growing optimism about the strength of the US and global recoveries.
Subsequent concerns over the summer months about a US slowdown, combined with record high oil prices and the dampening effect that they could have on consumption in several countries, have led to a sharp drop in yields from those earlier levels.
Spreads between the yields on Canadian and US government bonds have generally widened over the period, largely as a result of movements in US yields.
Although the Canadian dollar also exhibited significant movements over the period, it is broadly stronger since the time of the last Report, having appreciated by slightly over 7 per cent relative to both the US dollar and the C-5 index of currencies.
By mid-May, when the growth outlook in the United States was at its most optimistic, the Canadian dollar had fallen to approximately 71.5 cents US.
Following this, however, a combination of weaker-than-expected US growth, stronger Canadian growth, and firming commodity prices contributed to the appreciation of the Canadian dollar, which is currently trading at close to 80 cents US.
The global economy is expected to continue to expand over the next two years, fuelled by robust growth in Asia, somewhat above potential growth in the United States, and moderate growth in Europe and Japan.
The pace of expansion will be dampened by the recent sharp increase in oil prices, however, and by a move to higher interest rates as economies currently experiencing excess supply conditions move closer to full production capacity.
The Bank's base-case projection calls for world economic growth to moderate from about 4.75 per cent in 2004 to about 4 per cent in 2005, and to pick up to about 4.25 per cent in 2006.
While the outlook is favourable, there are a number of uncertainties, especially beyond mid-2005.
The timing and extent of fiscal consolidation in most major economies is unclear at this time.
More broadly, the form of the resolution of current account imbalances, notably those in the United States and East Asia, is difficult to ascertain.
And there remain ongoing geopolitical concerns.
Over the next two and a half years, the Bank's base-case projection for the US economy is for growth at a rate slightly faster than that of its production capacity.
The key economic driver in the United States is expected to be strong growth in business investment, responding to underinvestment in recent years and to very favourable financing conditions.
Productivity gains from past and future investments and capital deepening are expected to maintain the growth of potential output at about 3 1/2 per cent.
The past depreciation of the US dollar should boost net exports, while the recent sharp increase in oil prices, together with a reduction in monetary stimulus, and some assumed fiscal consolidation, will dampen growth in household spending.
The output gap, estimated at 1 per cent in the third quarter of 2004, is projected to narrow further during 2006.
In Europe, the recovery, although uneven, is now somewhat more firmly anchored.
Robust growth in some countries, such as the United Kingdom, is counterbalanced by less-favourable prospects in Germany and Italy.
The recovery in Japan is expected to be sustained, albeit at a slower pace than recorded at the end of 2003 and early 2004.
Emerging-market countries in Asia should continue to contribute positively to world growth if China successfully moves towards a more sustainable growth path.
There are risks to the outlook for 2005.
On the upside, investment growth and inventory rebuilding in the United States may be stronger than expected, and the Chinese economy may not slow as much as projected.
The US-dollar prices of non-energy commodities are expected to remain at a relatively high level over the next two years as a result of the global economic expansion, although they are likely to ease over time as new supplies come on stream.
The price of crude oil is assumed to remain above US$50 per barrel in the first half of 2005 and to ease to about US$43 per barrel by the second half of 2006.
Natural gas prices, which will likely move up with the onset of the winter heating season, are expected to remain at relatively high levels through 2006.
These assumptions are consistent with the current market expectations embodied in futures prices.
The Bank's base-case scenario for oil prices is well above that used in both the last Report and Update.
Continued strong growth of final domestic demand is expected to contribute importantly to economic expansion in Canada through to 2006.
Business investment is projected to strengthen further as a result of strong growth in the global economy and the resulting high level of commodity prices, very favourable financial conditions, and reductions in the prices of imported machinery and equipment.
Solid growth in consumer spending should be sustained by further gains in real incomes.
Housing investment is expected to stabilize at current high levels, as supply catches up with demand.
And spending by all levels of government is projected to rise broadly in line with revenues as governments strive to maintain fiscal balance.
While continued global economic expansion implies further gains for Canadian exports, this is projected to be more than offset by faster growth in imports.
The past appreciation of the Canadian dollar is expected to continue to dampen the growth of Canada's exports and to boost that of imports through 2005.
At mid-2003, the levels of both exports and imports seemed well below those indicated by their historical relationships with measures of real income and relative prices.
Since then, exports have moved back up near their predicted long-run levels, while imports continue to be much lower than expected.
These puzzling developments, together with substantial and ongoing revisions to the trade data, make the projection of the future contribution of net exports to GDP growth particularly uncertain.
More generally, given the various forces at play in the global economy, there are risks around our projections for imports and exports, and for business investment.
Higher-than-expected oil prices, both actual and prospective, should tend to reduce demand for Canadian exports, raise production costs for Canadian firms, and dampen household spending, all else being equal.
However, given the time necessary for regulatory approvals before major new projects can proceed, and given tight markets for many inputs, including skilled labour, the impact of higher oil prices on the capital expenditures of energy-producing companies is expected to be limited in the short term.
Thus, higher energy prices are likely to have a small negative effect on Canadian GDP in the near term, before the positive impact on capital spending and energy output in Canada becomes more pronounced.
The Bank's base-case projection for Canada calls for real GDP growth to average about 3 per cent (the estimated growth rate of production capacity), at an annual rate, over the period from the second half of 2004 to the end of 2006.
Given the effects of higher oil prices, including a slowing in US economic expansion, and the anticipated further dampening of net exports arising from the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar, growth is expected to be slightly less than 3 per cent during 2005 and slightly more in 2006.
This implies growth, on an annual average basis, of just under 3 per cent in 2004 and 2005, and about 3.25 per cent in 2006.
The projection for growth in 2004 is a little higher than in the April Report and the July Update, whereas the projection for 2005 is lower.
This growth scenario implies that the Canadian economy may experience some small renewed excess supply in 2005 before returning close to its production capacity by mid-2006.
The base-case scenario assumes further withdrawal of monetary stimulus over time to keep the economy near its production capacity and achieve the inflation target.
While most indicators of short-term inflation expectations that the Bank follows have moved up modestly since mid-April, many of the key medium- and longer-term measures remain close to 2 per cent.
In the regular survey reported in the autumn issue of the Conference Board of Canada's Index of Business Confidence, 72 per cent of respondents expected prices, in general, to rise over the next six months at a rate of 2 per cent or less.
This is a lower percentage than reported nine months earlier.
As well, while just under 90 per cent of firms in the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey expected CPI inflation to be within a range of 1 to 3 per cent, on average, over the next two years, 54 per cent of respondents expected inflation to be in the upper part of the range.
On the other hand, the average private sector forecast for total CPI inflation in both 2004 and 2005 is around 2 per cent.
Consensus forecasts of inflation for 2006 and beyond also continue to be very close to 2 per cent.
There is a heightened risk that the recent surge in the global prices of energy may pass through to the prices of non-energy goods and services.
Recent experience suggests that this pass-through effect is likely to be relatively small and spread out over a period of about two years.
However, this experience may understate the pass-through of the recent increase in energy prices owing to its expected persistence.
On the other hand, the appreciation of the Canadian dollar since early 2003 is expected to continue to exert some slight downward pressure on core inflation.
Increases in average hourly earnings of permanent workers are expected to rise somewhat between now and 2006.
At the same time, with growth in labour productivity expected to pick up over this period, the projected year-to-year increase in unit labour costs, while rising, should be at or below 2 per cent through the projection horizon.
Growth in the narrow money aggregates - M1+ and M1++ - has continued its upward trend since the last Report.
Although the pace moderated somewhat in July and August, it remains strong on a year-over-year basis.
This strength is broadly consistent with the low interest rate environment and suggests strong output growth in coming quarters.
Since the last Report, the growth of broad money - M2++ - has continued to recover from the low levels of 2003.
This recovery is attributed to the faster growth of the narrow money aggregates and, to a lesser extent, faster growth in non-money-market mutual funds.
The stronger growth in M2++ points to a reduction in the risk of disinflationary pressure.
The excess supply in the Canadian economy, which was evident through most of 2003 and into early 2004, should keep core inflation slightly below longer-run expectations over the next few quarters.
The past appreciation of the Canadian dollar is also expected to exert a little downward pressure on the core rate through 2005.
The year-over-year rate of increase in the core CPI is projected to remain at about 1.5 per cent for the rest of this year.
This outlook incorporates larger monthly increases in the seasonally adjusted core CPI relative to those experienced in the first eight months of 2004, because recent price discounting for such items as clothing and non-shelter services is expected to moderate, and annual increases for tuition fees and property taxes are anticipated.
In view of the volatility in the core rate observed in 2004 to date, the level of uncertainty surrounding the near-term monitoring of core inflation is somewhat higher than normal.
With the economy operating near its potential over the projection period, the effects of other factors roughly cancelling each other, and inflation expectations remaining well anchored, the core rate of inflation is projected to move up to the 2 per cent target by the end of 2005 and to remain at 2 per cent through 2006.
Developments in the markets for crude oil will continue to have a crucial impact on the outlook for the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI.
Based on the assumption that the price of crude oil will remain above US$50 per barrel through to mid-2005, total CPI inflation is likely to rise near the top of the target range and stay there until the middle of next year.
With the WTI price of oil assumed to ease below US$50 per barrel in the second half of 2005 and then to decrease further to US$43 per barrel by the second half of 2006, total CPI inflation should fall sharply in the second half of next year and stay below the core rate of inflation through 2006.
The adjustment of the Canadian economy to major global developments continues to shape the economic outlook.
These developments include solid world economic growth; a realignment of world currencies, including the Canadian dollar; movements in the prices of crude oil and non-energy commodities; and the growing global presence of China and India.
Canadian monetary policy facilitates the adjustment process by aiming to keep inflation at its 2 per cent target and the economy operating near its production capacity.
The near-term outlook for the global economy is a touch weaker than projected in the October Monetary Policy Report, but there is now greater confidence in the momentum of the US economy in 2005.
The Canadian economy is expected to have been marginally weaker in the fourth quarter of 2004 than projected in the last Report, owing partly to a somewhat more pronounced adjustment to the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
As well, since October, the dollar has traded in a higher range than it had prior to the October Report.
Largely reflecting the dampening effects on aggregate demand of the recent appreciation of the Canadian dollar, the economy is expected to operate a little further below its full production capacity in 2005 than was anticipated at the time of the last Report.
For 2006, growth is projected to pick up to slightly more than 3 per cent, consistent with returning the economy to its production capacity in the second half of the year, and returning core inflation to the 2 per cent target around the end of 2006.
In line with this revised outlook, the pace of reduction in monetary stimulus is likely to be slower than envisioned in the October Report.
Against this background, the Bank left its target for the overnight rate unchanged in December and January.
This outlook is subject to both upside and downside risks and to uncertainties.
While the near-term risks surrounding the global economic outlook have lessened, there are still significant medium-term risks related to the evolution of oil prices, the pace of expansion in China, the way in which current account balances in the United States and East Asia will be resolved, and geopolitical developments.
Uncertainties with respect to the Canadian outlook continue to relate to the ongoing adjustments to changes in the global economy, including changes in the exchange rate.
Understanding the reasons behind exchange rate movements is crucial, because they may have different implications for aggregate demand and thus for monetary policy.
Canada's real GDP advanced at an annual rate of 3.2 per cent in the third quarter of 2004, supported by a rise in final domestic demand.
Exports, however, were considerably weaker than expected, contributing to a larger-than-anticipated buildup of inventories.
Economic growth is expected to have slowed to about 2.25 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2004 as firms began to correct this buildup.
Growth for the second half of 2004 is thus estimated to have been around 2.75 per cent - slightly lower than projected in the October Report.
This is also marginally below the Bank's estimate of growth in the economy's production potential.
Although considerable uncertainty is associated with any estimate of the output gap, the Bank judges that the economy is operating slightly below its capacity limits, consistent with its conventional measure of the output gap.
This judgment is also broadly consistent with the response of firms to the question on capacity pressures in the Bank's latest Business Outlook Survey.
Some indicators, however, point to more slack.
For instance, wage increases have remained quite moderate and, on average, core inflation has been below the 2 per cent midpoint of the target range since mid-2003.
In contrast, other indicators, such as capacity utilization in the non-farm, goods-producing sector, suggest greater pressure on capacity.
Core inflation remained near 1.5 per cent between August and December.
Modest excess supply in the Canadian economy through most of 2003 and in early 2004 contributed to keeping the core rate of inflation slightly below longer-run expectations.
Falling prices for many import-intensive goods, partly associated with the appreciation of the Canadian dollar, also continued to put downward pressure on core inflation in the second half of 2004.
At the same time, the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI averaged slightly more than 2 per cent, chiefly reflecting substantial increases in the consumer prices of gasoline and fuel oil from their levels a year earlier.
In the first half of 2004, the global economic upswing contributed to a surprisingly strong recovery in Canadian exports.
As a result, despite the earlier appreciation of the Canadian dollar, output rose sharply between December 2003 and August 2004 in a number of industries highly exposed to international trade.
Canadian exports fell back in the third quarter of 2004, and output in sectors highly exposed to international competition decreased somewhat in September and October.
The further increase in the Canadian dollar since mid-2004 and some moderation in the growth of global demand will likely weigh more heavily on these industries through 2005.
There are clearer indications of adjustment by Canadian firms to the past and recent appreciation of the dollar.
The Bank's latest Business Outlook Survey, conducted between mid-November and mid-December, showed a clear distinction between firms that have been adversely affected by the appreciation of the Canadian dollar and those that have not.
While the latter have become more optimistic about future sales prospects, the former - mostly manufacturers, exporters, and their suppliers have become noticeably pessimistic.
The Survey indicates that many firms are taking measures to improve productivity and reduce costs, not only in response to the dollar's appreciation, but also because of increased competition from Asian suppliers.
A growing number of firms have chosen to cut costs by increasing their imports of inputs and finished goods from Asia.
Some firms are adjusting to the appreciation by moving away from low-profit products and markets towards those yielding higher returns.
Still others are planning to increase their investment in machinery and equipment.
In contrast to previous surveys, these now include firms that report having been adversely affected by the appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
World oil prices have eased since late October.
Current oil futures contracts suggest that the West Texas Intermediate oil price will average around US$47 per barrel in the first half of 2005, before easing to about US$42 per barrel by the second half of 2006.
This scenario for oil prices is somewhat lower than that used in the last Report and provides a more solid base for prospective growth in the global economy.
The appreciation of the euro and the yen vis--vis the US dollar will direct demand away from Japan and the euro area towards China and the United States.
US economic growth will be underpinned by robust business expenditures and sustained consumer spending supported by employment gains.
The US economy is thus expected to grow by just under 4 per cent in 2005 and 2006.
In Canada, further strong growth of final domestic demand is expected to contribute importantly to economic growth this year and next.
Business investment is expected to increase substantially as a result of continued global economic expansion and the associated high level of commodity prices, favourable financial conditions, and ongoing reductions in the prices of imported machinery and equipment.
Further gains in real incomes should contribute to solid growth in consumer spending.
However, given rapid increases in recent years, housing investment is not expected to contribute further to growth in domestic demand.
This outlook assumes that spending by all levels of government will increase broadly in line with revenues, as governments continue to strive to maintain fiscal balance.
While ongoing growth abroad implies further gains in demand for Canadian exports, these gains are expected to be more than offset by faster growth in imports.
The past and recent appreciation of the Canadian dollar is expected to dampen export growth and to boost imports over the projection period.
However, the contribution of net exports to GDP growth continues to be highly uncertain.
Analyzing the evolution of Canada's international trade volumes in terms of the underlying fundamentals has been particularly difficult over the past two years, owing to the volatility of trade data, their susceptibility to revisions, and some puzzling developments in the context of major structural changes in the global economy.
The high level of oil prices assumed in the October Report was expected to have a small negative effect on Canadian aggregate demand in 2005, before the positive impact on capital spending and output by energy-producing companies became evident in 2006.
With the lower oil price scenario assumed in this Update, the adverse short-term effects on growth coming from the rise in oil and gas prices since late 2003 should be somewhat more muted.
The Bank's base-case projection calls for aggregate demand for Canadian goods and services to increase, on average over the projection period, just slightly faster than the 3 per cent estimated growth rate of potential output.
Given the effects of the past and recent appreciation of the Canadian dollar, the Bank projects real GDP growth to average a little less than 3 per cent in 2005 and a little more than 3 per cent in 2006, with a somewhat larger drag from net exports than projected in the October Report, but stronger growth in domestic demand.
This growth scenario implies some increase in excess supply in 2005 and a return to production potential in the second half of 2006.
The core rate of inflation is projected to average just above 1.5 per cent in the first half of 2005, before gradually rising to the 2 per cent target around the end of 2006.
The projected slack in product and labour markets is expected to keep core inflation below longer-run expectations through 2005 and most of 2006.
With the economy expected to move back to its production potential in the second half of 2006 and with inflation expectations remaining well anchored, the core rate should rise gradually to 2 per cent over the projection period.
The past and recent appreciation of the Canadian dollar is also expected to exert a small amount of downward pressure on the core rate during this period.
The outlook for the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI will continue to be importantly affected by developments in the market for crude oil.
Based on the scenario embodied in oil price futures, total CPI inflation is expected to remain just above 2 per cent in the first half of 2005 and then to fall considerably in the second half of the year before rising towards the core rate of inflation through 2006.
The global economy has been unfolding largely as expected, and prospects for continued robust growth are quite favourable, especially over the near term.
These include the realignment of currencies in response to global imbalances, the higher prices of both energy and non-energy commodities, and growing competition from emerging-market economies.
The sectoral adjustments to these developments are becoming more evident.
Many Canadian commodity-producing sectors are expanding.
However, firms in a number of other sectors exposed to international trade are facing pressure from the appreciation of the Canadian dollar and from foreign competition.
On balance, net exports have been a drag on the economy.
Canadian monetary policy continues to facilitate the adjustment process by aiming to keep inflation at the 2 per cent target and the economy operating near its production capacity.
The Bank continues to judge that the economy is operating slightly below its full production capacity.
After appreciating sharply in 2003 and 2004, the Canadian dollar has been fluctuating in a range of around 80 to 83 cents US since the beginning of the year.
The Bank's base-case projection calls for annualized growth of about 2.5 per cent in the first half of 2005 and 3 per cent in the second half.
Growth of about 3.5 per cent is expected over the four quarters of 2006, consistent with returning the economy to full production capacity in the second half of that year.
Expressed on an annual average basis, growth in 2005 is projected to be about 2.5 per cent, down slightly from the January Update, while the projection for 2006 is little changed at about 3.25 per cent.
We continue to expect core inflation to move back to the 2 per cent target around the end of 2006.
Based on the scenario implied by oil-price futures, total CPI inflation is projected to remain slightly above 2 per cent this year and to move slightly below 2 per cent in the second half of 2006.
Growth in the Canadian economy this year and next is anticipated to come primarily from domestic demand, as net exports are expected to exert a drag on the economy.
To continue to support aggregate demand, the Bank decided to leave the target for the overnight rate unchanged at 2.5 per cent on 1 March and 12 April.
In line with the Bank's outlook, a reduction of monetary stimulus will be required over time.
These risks include the pace of expansion in Asia, and the prices of oil and non-energy commodities.
A further risk relates to the resolution of current account imbalances, with the risk of a disorderly correction growing over time, should these imbalances persist.
Most of the uncertainties with respect to the Canadian outlook continue to relate to how the economy is adjusting to the relative price changes associated with major global developments.
In the past year, core CPI inflation has been relatively stable, fluctuating in a range of 1.5 to 1.8 per cent.
The surge in crude oil prices since the end of 2003 has pushed the average rate of increase in the total CPI to slightly more than 2 per cent over the same period.
The core rate of inflation moved up to 1.8 per cent in February from 1.5 per cent in August 2004, still below the Bank's 2 per cent inflation-control target.
This is virtually the same as the rise projected in the January Update.
Other measures of the trend rate of inflation that the Bank follows also remained below the 2 per cent target.
The modest amount of excess supply in the Canadian economy through much of 2003 and 2004 contributed to keeping the core rate slightly below longer-run expectations.
Further reductions in the prices of many import-intensive goods, caused by the appreciation of the Canadian dollar and ongoing decreases in the global prices of some consumer goods, also continued to put downward pressure on core inflation over the period.
The rate of increase in homeowners' replacement costs, an important component of core prices for shelter, has also eased somewhat since July 2004 as a result of lower year-over-year increases in the prices of new housing.
Fluctuations in car prices, reflecting changes in manufacturers' incentives programs, explain much of the short-term variation in core inflation observed since mid-2004.
Since last August, the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was, on average, just above 2 per cent.
The higher rate of increase relative to the core rate chiefly reflected the impact of substantial increases in the prices of energy commodities on selected CPI components.
In particular, in February there were substantial increases in consumer prices for gasoline, fuel oil, natural gas, and intercity transportation from year-earlier levels.
Canada's real GDP grew at an annual rate of 2.9 per cent in the third quarter of 2004, as expected in the October Report.
In the fourth quarter, economic growth eased to an annual rate of 1.7 per cent.
For the second half of the year as a whole, exports were markedly weaker than projected, although this was partly offset by unexpectedly large inventory investment.
Economic growth is likely to be on the order of 2.5 per cent in the first quarter of 2005.
Final domestic demand continued to rise substantially in the second half of 2004, and inventory investment rose markedly in response to this robust growth and to concerns about delivery lags.
In contrast, the volume of net exports fell back.
Canadian exports decreased sharply in the second half of 2004.
Although a good part of this decline reflected an unwinding of the surprising surge recorded in the first half, it more fundamentally represented the ongoing adjustment to the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
That adjustment has been most evident in those export components characterized by product differentiation.
Indeed, in the second half of last year, export volumes of machinery and equipment and non-automotive consumer goods relative to indicators of foreign activity resumed the steep decline that began in 2003.
In contrast, exports of commodities relative to US industrial production, while fluctuating over the course of 2004, were little changed at year-end from 2003 levels.
Exports of automotive products were also little changed over the course of last year relative to US indicators of activity for the motor vehicle sector.
Among the components of final domestic demand, the pace of business investment picked up markedly towards year-end.
Part of the increase in final domestic demand was met by substantial gains in imports.
The rise in inventory investment also contributed to boost imports.
Some of the marked rise in import volumes relative to indicators of domestic activity, especially for such items as machinery and equipment and crude and fabricated materials, reflected the impact of the higher Canadian dollar, as well as growing competition from low-cost emerging markets.
The Canadian economy is continuing to adjust to major global developments.
These include a marked realignment of world currencies, including the Canadian dollar; high price levels for crude oil and non-energy commodities; and the growing global economic impact of China and India.
Since the October Report, there have been more indications of the sectoral effects of these global developments and of firms' responses to these changes.
The strong global economic expansion boosted profitability for most of the industries with high exposure to international trade in the first three quarters of 2004.
In the fourth quarter of last year, however, profitability eased off in many of these industries, following a reduction in the global demand for Canadian products and a further appreciation of the Canadian dollar from the middle of 2004.
As a result, there was only marginal growth in the overall level of activity in sectors highly exposed to international competition from August 2004 to January 2005.
In contrast, most sectors with a low exposure to foreign competition - such as housing, retail and wholesale trade, and finance, insurance and real estate - made further solid gains in output.
Some of these sectors also benefited from lower costs for imported products.
These global economic developments can be expected to lead to important shifts in the composition of activity among the broad sectors of the Canadian economy.
One important channel through which this takes place is major shifts in capital spending at the sectoral level in response to expected persistent changes in profitability.
Increases in investment expenditures are particularly pronounced in oil and natural gas extraction, other mining activity, and in the manufacture of wood products.
The substantial gains in Canada's final domestic demand in recent years have also led to a marked rise in capital spending in many sectors with a low exposure to international trade, especially electric power generation, finance and insurance, information and cultural industries, and the manufacture of refined petroleum products.
Moreover, in many of the sectors either producing commodities or with a low exposure to international trade, a large part of the increase in capital spending is directed at expanding capacity.
In contrast, there is likely to be prolonged downward pressure on profitability in many industries highly exposed to international competition (other than those producing energy and other commodities), primarily because of the Canadian dollar's appreciation and growing competition from such economies as China and India.
As a result, investment spending in these industries seems to be directed at reducing costs and improving competitiveness rather than at increasing capacity.
More broadly, the Bank's Business Outlook Surveys have shown that many firms adversely affected by global developments are taking various measures to improve productivity and reduce costs.
For instance, an increasing number of producers are choosing to cut costs by importing more inputs from Asia.
Others are adjusting to the higher Canadian dollar by phasing out production of goods and services with low profit margins and concentrating on those with higher returns.
The adjustments being made by firms in response to global economic developments also continued to be reflected in the sectoral composition of employment changes.
Employment has tended to rise since the end of 2003 in those industries producing commodities or having low exposure to foreign competition.
On the other hand, employment has fallen in the other manufacturing industries highly exposed to international trade, reflecting to some extent the substitution of capital for labour in order to reduce costs.
The spring Business Outlook Survey indicates that employment growth over the next 12 months will be concentrated in service industries.
This reallocation of capital and labour involves adjustment costs that may cause a temporary slowdown in productivity growth and, therefore, in the growth of potential output.
The level of economic activity at the end of 2004 was broadly in line with the Bank's expectations in the January Update.
While output growth in the fourth quarter of 2004 was somewhat lower than expected, this was largely offset by upward revisions to Statistics Canada's estimates of growth earlier in the year.
At the same time, the Bank's conventional measure of potential output for 2004 was revised down slightly relative to the estimate used in the January Update.
As a result, the Bank's conventional measure of the output gap indicated that the economy was operating at about its capacity limits in the fourth quarter of 2004, instead of slightly below its effective capacity, as in the last Update.
Other indicators point to greater pressure on capacity than the conventional measure.
For instance, capacity utilization in the non-farm, goods-producing sector in the fourth quarter of 2004 remained considerably higher than its average for 2000 to 2003, because growth of capacity in this sector has been relatively low in recent years, owing to weak investment spending and some write-off of uneconomic capacity as a result of relative price changes.
Nevertheless, it is important to note that several indicators currently suggest more economic slack than is implied by the conventional measure.
On average, the core rate of inflation has been below the 2 per cent midpoint of the target range since mid-2003.
As well, wage increases have remained quite moderate, and the proportion of firms reporting labour shortages or difficulties in meeting an unanticipated increase in demand was lower than average in the spring Business Outlook Survey.
The degree of economic slack varies across industries and regions because of the ongoing process of adjusting to global changes.
Based on an assessment of all the indicators of capacity pressures, including those from the Business Outlook Survey, the Bank judges that there is slightly more excess supply in the Canadian economy than suggested by its conventional measure.
The underlying rate of increase in wages, based on such measures as the average hourly earnings of permanent workers, appears to have remained in a range between 2.25 and 3.25 per cent since the middle of 2004.
The year-to-year gain in another wage measure - hourly labour compensation in the business sector - was somewhat lower, at 2 per cent at the end of last year.
For example, in Western Canada, wage gains have generally been higher than in the rest of the country, reflecting a greater prevalence of labour shortages in that region.
With only a slight increase in productivity over the past year, unit labour costs in the business sector in the fourth quarter of 2004 rose by just under 2 per cent from year-earlier levels.
Indeed, productivity growth was surprisingly low in both 2003 and 2004, easing markedly from its average performance over the 1998 to 2002 period.
That reduction in productivity growth was broadly based across sectors and stands in sharp contrast to the US experience.
The assumption about the pace of productivity growth embodied in the Bank's outlook is discussed in Section 4.
With substantial increases in the global prices for Canadian exports of energy commodities and many industrial materials, Canada's terms of trade improved considerably in 2004.
As a result, the chain price index for GDP (a broad price measure of the goods and services produced in Canada) rose 4.2 per cent between the fourth quarter of 2003 and the fourth quarter of 2004.
By comparison, the prices of goods and services purchased by Canadians rose 2 per cent over the same period.
This terms-of-trade improvement has thus produced a significant increase in real income, which has been reflected in the growth of corporate profits and government tax revenues.
The price of crude oil has increased further since the end of 2004, reflecting upward revisions to the projected global demand for oil and downward revisions to expected non-OPEC supplies.
The prices of non-energy commodities have also risen since the end of 2004.
At the same time, continued strong global demand, as well as a number of planned production cutbacks, have led to a further rise in metals prices.
For both the global economy and for Canada, financial conditions have remained very favourable since the October Report.
Yields and credit spreads on corporate bonds are close to historically low levels.
Equity markets have improved over recent months, and market volatility has remained low.
Sustained improvement in the balance sheets of Canadian banks, aggressive competition among suppliers of credit, and modest demand for credit have led to continued easing in bank-lending conditions in Canada.
Mainly because of strong supply conditions, growth in business credit continues to pick up.
Meanwhile, both supply and demand continue to support robust growth in household credit.
Business-credit conditions are quite favourable, both in Canada and internationally.
In financial markets, the demand for higher-yielding, somewhat riskier products remains strong.
Demand is supported by fairly robust corporate earnings and the low yields returned by government securities.
This has contributed to high bond prices and relatively low credit spreads.
Most equity markets have improved since the October Report, with the TSX Composite Index increasing by about 10 per cent.
Credit defaults have been at cyclical lows, and the share of credit-rating upgrades in total credit-rating changes continued to rise.
The growth of business credit currently stands close to its 10-year average.
The pickup in short-term business credit has continued, boosted by easier lending conditions.
Growth in long-term business credit (including income trusts) has also remained robust since the October Report, helped by a stable net issuance of bonds and equities.
Most of the increase in business credit has reportedly been channelled towards general business operations and debt refinancing rather than towards new investment.
Household credit has continued to advance at a rapid pace since the October Report, with both consumer credit and residential mortgage credit contributing to the increase.
At the same time, low interest rates and favourable labour market conditions have helped ensure that household balance sheets remain healthy.
The elevated level of household credit growth is likely to be associated with strong consumption in the first part of this year.
In summary, a broad range of financial indicators point to a considerable amount of liquidity in the global economy, as well as in the Canadian economy.
The yield curve in the United States has moved higher since the time of the October Report.
It has also continued to flatten, mainly driven by larger increases in short-term interest rates.
Futures prices indicate that markets anticipate further increases in the federal funds rate over the remainder of the year, with US forward rates implying a policy rate of approximately 4.0 per cent by the end of December 2005.
Canadian asset prices indicate expectations of a more gradual trajectory for increases in interest rates here than in the United States.
This divergence in the expected paths for policy rates in the two countries has contributed to sharply declining interest rate differentials across the yield curve.
Yields on two-year Canadian bonds are now approximately 60 basis points below those on US Treasuries, and yield spreads on longer-term bonds have turned negative for the first time in over four years.
After appreciating sharply from the time of the October Report until early December, major currencies weakened against the US dollar, and the Canadian dollar has traded within a range of 80 to 83 cents US.
This has occurred within the context of rising US interest rates, relative economic weakness in Japan and Europe, rising energy prices, and generally high prices for other commodities.
On balance, the global economy has been performing largely as expected at the time of the October Report, and growth is projected to remain relatively strong, at around 4 per cent in both 2005 and 2006, in spite of higher oil prices.
While the overall growth picture for the next two years has changed little from the October Report, the distribution of growth is more uneven among major economies than previously expected, with upward revisions to the already strong growth prospects in non-Japan Asia offsetting downward adjustments to the growth outlook in Japan and the European Union.
Recent economic developments in the United States suggest that underlying momentum remains strong.
Real GDP grew at an annual rate of 4 per cent in the third quarter of 2004 and 3.8 per cent in the fourth quarter.
Consumer spending and business investment were both very robust in the second half of the year.
Despite the significant real effective depreciation of the US dollar, net exports continued to restrain growth in the second half of 2004.
Evidence to date indicates that growth remained near 4 per cent in the first quarter of 2005.
The US economy is expected to post growth rates that will be somewhat above potential in 2005 and 2006, albeit lower than in 2004.
As a result, excess supply (estimated at somewhat below 1 per cent of GDP at the end of 2004) should be largely eliminated over the next two years.
Business investment should remain solid, since the capital stock appears unusually low at this point in the cycle.
Moreover, the past depreciation of the US dollar should contribute to a strong recovery in export growth.
Meanwhile, household expenditures are likely to slow, partly because of the dampening impact of higher oil prices and of past and anticipated increases in interest rates.
At the same time, the contribution of Asia (excluding Japan) to the world economic expansion is slightly greater than previously expected.
In particular, growth in China has remained surprisingly buoyant despite the implementation of administrative tightening measures and higher domestic interest rates.
Accordingly, the outlook calls for a more gradual slowing profile than was assumed at the time of the October Report.
In contrast, growth in Japan turned out to be weaker than anticipated.
Following a sharp rise in the first quarter of 2004, real GDP was relatively stagnant throughout the remainder of the year, owing largely to the impact of an inventory correction in IT-related sectors, higher oil prices, and typhoons.
A gradual pickup in quarterly growth throughout 2005 is expected, as the effect of the adverse factors that restrained aggregate demand in the latter part of 2004 diminishes.
Nevertheless, the average annual growth rate in 2005 should be significantly lower than in 2004, owing to the low starting point.
A gradual pickup in the rate of growth of economic activity is expected this year and next, as the adverse impact stemming from the past appreciation of the euro and the rise in world oil prices gradually tapers off.
While the overall global short-term outlook is favourable, a number of risks and uncertainties remain, including the future course of oil prices, the pace of expansion in China, and geopolitical developments.
A key risk relates to the unfolding of current account imbalances, with the risk of a disorderly correction growing over time if the imbalances persist.
Indeed, despite a substantial real effective depreciation of the US dollar since early 2002, external imbalances have continued to widen and are likely to continue to do so in the near term.
An orderly correction of external imbalances will require increased savings in the United States, a strengthening of demand elsewhere, notably in Japan and Europe, combined with further real effective depreciation of the US dollar.
Greater exchange rate flexibility in Asia would facilitate the adjustment.
The projected global economic expansion should help maintain the US-dollar prices of non-energy commodities at relatively high levels over the remainder of 2005 and through 2006, although some easing is likely as new supplies become available.
On the other hand, any further real depreciation of the US dollar would put upward pressure on non-energy commodity prices, expressed in US-dollar terms.
With regard to crude oil, the Bank's base-case scenario - which is based on recent futures prices - assumes that prices will be close to US$57 per barrel over the remainder of 2005 and then ease slightly to about US$54 per barrel by the second half of 2006.
Natural gas prices are expected to stay at relatively high levels through 2006.
The Bank's base-case scenario for oil prices is markedly higher than in the January Update.
Given the effects of the past and recent appreciation of the Canadian dollar, the Bank expects growth, on an average annual basis, of about 2.5 per cent in 2005.
Growth should pick up to about 3.25 per cent in 2006.
The Bank's outlook for growth in 2005 is slightly lower than projected in the January Update, reflecting weaker-than-expected growth in the fourth quarter of 2004.
Projected quarterly growth through the year, however, is unchanged from the January Update.
While the Bank's growth projection for 2005 is the same as the latest Consensus outlook, the projection for 2006 is slightly higher.
The Bank's projection assumes real GDP growth of 2.5 per cent, at an annual rate, during the first half of 2005.
This is expected to move up to about 3 per cent in the second half of this year and to about 3.5 per cent over the four quarters of 2006.
This outlook for growth implies a modest rise in excess supply in the first half of 2005 and a return to production capacity in the second half of 2006.
Were it to persist, the sluggish growth in labour productivity in the past two years would put the Bank's projection for potential output growth at risk.
However, recent and projected increases in business investment, as well as continued rapid growth in labour productivity in the United States, make it reasonable to assume a resumption of productivity growth.
Therefore, at this time, the Bank continues to project growth in production capacity of 3 per cent.
This is based on the assumptions of trend growth of 1 1/4 per cent in labour inputs and trend growth of 1 3/4 per cent in labour productivity.
Economic expansion in Canada this year and next is expected to be supported primarily by the continued substantial growth of final domestic demand.
As noted earlier, there is still considerable monetary stimulus supporting demand at this time.
The Bank's outlook continues to incorporate a reduction of monetary stimulus over the projection period.
Capital spending by businesses is projected to increase even more strongly than last year, reflecting the global economic expansion and the associated high levels of prices for both energy and non-energy commodities, very favourable financial conditions, high profit levels, and further decreases in the prices of imported machinery and equipment.
Ongoing gains in real incomes, the effects of monetary stimulus, and the high level of consumer confidence should contribute to further solid growth in consumer spending.
However, following the rapid increases in recent years, housing investment, on balance, is expected to remain unchanged over this period.
Spending on renovations is projected to rise strongly, offsetting the impact of anticipated reductions in housing starts and resale activity.
This outlook incorporates the expectations that spending by all levels of government will rise at about the same rate as revenues, as governments continue to work to maintain fiscal balance.
However, this is expected to be more than offset by rapid growth in imports in both 2005 and 2006.
The past appreciation of the Canadian dollar is expected to continue to dampen the growth of Canada's exports and to boost import growth over the projection period.
As well, imports will be boosted by strong investment in machinery and equipment.
In the January Update, the high level of oil prices was expected to have a slight adverse effect on aggregate demand in Canada in 2005, before the positive impact on investment and production in the energy sector became evident in 2006.
Given the markedly higher outlook for oil prices in this Report, the downside pressure on demand for Canadian exports and on household spending is likely to be somewhat larger than expected in the last Update.
However, stronger-than-expected growth in capital spending by energy producers, based on recent investment intentions, should more than offset that negative effect by 2006.
Most indicators of inflation expectations that the Bank follows have been little changed since mid-October, and many of the key medium - and longer-term measures remain very close to 2 per cent.
However, even though 93 per cent of firms in the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey expected CPI inflation to be within a range of 1 to 3 per cent, on average, over the next two years, 60 per cent of respondents expected inflation to be in the upper part of the range.
On the other hand, the average private sector forecast for total CPI inflation in both 2005 and 2006 is just under 2 per cent.
Consensus forecasts of inflation for 2007 and beyond also continue to be very close to 2 per cent.
There remains a risk that the higher costs arising from the persistently high level of the global prices of energy and other raw materials could be passed through to the prices of non-energy goods and services.
Indeed, there is some anecdotal evidence that part of the sharply higher costs of some metals is raising the prices of some durable goods, such as major appliances.
The most recent experience, however, suggests that this pass-through effect is likely to be relatively small and spread out over time.
In contrast, the appreciation of the Canadian dollar since early 2003 is expected to be a continuing source of slight downward pressure on core inflation during the projection period.
There also appear to be ongoing reductions in the world prices of some consumer goods as a result of increasing supplies from countries such as China.
Increases in average hourly earnings of permanent workers are expected to move up somewhat through 2006.
Nevertheless, with labour-productivity growth anticipated to resume over this period, year-to-year gains in unit labour costs should remain at or below 2 per cent through the projection period.
Implications of money growth Growth in the narrow money aggregates - M1+ and M1++ - has slowed since the last Report and is broadly consistent with projected output growth of slightly above 2 per cent in the first quarter of 2005.
Since the October Report, the growth of M2++ has stabilized at just under 6 per cent on a year-over-year basis, despite the strength in the narrow money aggregates over the same period.
This rate of growth for M2++ is consistent with inflation under 2 per cent.
The small amount of excess supply projected for the Canadian economy should keep core inflation slightly below longer-run expectations through 2005 and most of 2006.
The core rate of inflation is projected to stay near 1.7 per cent through to the end of 2005.
With the economy expected to move back to its production potential in the second half of 2006 and with inflation expectations remaining well anchored, the core rate should rise gradually to 2 per cent around the end of 2006.
The outlook for the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI will continue to be crucially affected by developments in the market for crude oil.
Based on the scenario embodied in oil-price futures, total CPI inflation is projected to stay above 2 per cent for some time, before moving down slightly below 2 per cent in the second half of 2006.
The update on global and Canadian economic developments presented in this Report highlights three issues.
First, the balance of information on capacity pressures indicates that the Canadian economy is operating close to its production limits.
Second, over the past several months, further progress has been made across sectors of the Canadian economy in adjusting to global developments.
Third, while the risks to the outlook through 2006 appear balanced, the medium-term risks related to global imbalances are increasing.
On the whole, the Bank's outlook for output and inflation in Canada through to the end of 2006 is little changed from the scenario outlined in the April Monetary Policy Report.
The global economy has been unfolding broadly as expected, and prospects remain favourable for growth of about 4 per cent this year and next.
However, growth has been less balanced than expected across economic zones, with the momentum stronger in Asia but weaker in Europe.
In Canada, strong growth in final domestic demand continues to offset the drag from net exports.
The Bank's base-case projection calls for growth of real GDP to be 2.7 per cent in 2005 and to rise to 3.3 per cent in 2006.
The Canadian economy is thus expected to remain near its production capacity through the period, and inflation is projected to return to 2 per cent by the end of next year.
To support aggregate demand, the Bank has held the target for the overnight rate unchanged at 2 1/2 per cent since October 2004.
However, in line with the Bank's outlook, some reduction in the amount of monetary stimulus will be required in the near term to keep aggregate demand and supply in balance and inflation on target.
Risks to the outlook over the next four to six quarters relate primarily to the future path of oil and non-energy commodity prices, the pace of growth in China, and the ongoing adjustment of the Canadian economy to global developments.
These risks appear balanced.
Over the medium term, there is increasing risk that the correction of global current account imbalances could involve a period of weakness in world aggregate demand.
Medium-term risks will be more fully addressed in the October Monetary Policy Report, when the Bank's projection horizon is extended to include 2007.
Canada's real GDP rose at an annual rate of 2.3 per cent in the first quarter of 2005, very close to the 2.5 per cent rate expected at the time of the April Report.
However, at 5.8 per cent, the expansion of final domestic demand was stronger than anticipated in the April Report, while reductions in both net exports and inventory investment weighed more negatively on growth than expected.
There is further evidence that the Canadian economy is continuing to adjust to global developments.
The strong gains in final domestic demand generated further solid output growth in sectors with a low exposure to foreign competition.
In contrast, since the end of 2004, there has been a small reduction in the overall level of activity in non-commodity-producing industries highly exposed to international competition.
While production also declined in commodity-producing industries during the first quarter, this largely reflected temporary production disruptions at an oil sands facility, the impact of adverse weather conditions on oil and gas drilling, and reduced foreign demand for lumber.
These industries staged a partial recovery in April.
The results from the Bank's summer Business Outlook Survey also show that the Canadian economy is adjusting to global developments.
For example, capital spending is expected to increase particularly strongly in commodity-producing industries and in many areas of the services sector.
The Survey also suggests that employment growth will continue to be concentrated in service and commodity-producing industries.
Based on available information, it appears that the Canadian economy grew by about 2.3 per cent in the second quarter.
Current indicators suggest that final domestic demand continued to rise solidly.
Moreover, several developments point to the prospect of a pickup in the pace of activity in the second half of the year.
A further decrease in the rate of inventory accumulation in the second quarter should leave inventory levels and sales better aligned.
Momentum appears to be building in capital spending, and employment growth has picked up.
The Bank's conventional estimate of the output gap indicates that the economy was operating with a slight amount of excess supply in the second quarter of 2005.
Based on its assessment of all indicators, it is the Governing Council's judgment that the economy was operating with slightly more excess supply at mid-year than the conventional measure suggests, but was still close to its capacity limits.
The 12-month rate of increase in the consumer price index has continued to exhibit considerable volatility, rising to 2.4 per cent in April and falling to 1.6 per cent in May.
This is largely due to fluctuations in gasoline prices.
In contrast, the core rate of inflation has remained relatively stable, fluctuating in a range between 1.6 and 1.9 per cent since the beginning of the year.
Since late May, world oil prices have strengthened further.
Current oil futures contracts indicate that the West Texas Intermediate price of oil will average around US$60 per barrel over the projection period.
This scenario for oil prices is somewhat higher than that used in the last Report, especially for 2006.
On balance, the global economy has been unfolding largely as expected at the time of the April Report, with prospects for growth essentially unchanged at about 4 per cent in both 2005 and 2006.
US real GDP grew by 3.8 per cent at annual rates in the first quarter of 2005, in line with expectations.
Monthly indicators for the second quarter point to solid growth in domestic demand.
As a result, the base-case outlook for US economic growth in 2005 is essentially the same as in the April Report, which called for robust growth in 2005.
Output growth is projected to remain strong in the United States in 2006.
The projection assumes a gradual slowing in household spending and a rise in net exports.
Growth has been less balanced than anticipated across other economic zones, with momentum stronger than expected in Asia but weaker in Europe.
In this regard, growth in China's real GDP has remained very strong, and the first-quarter rebound in Japan's real GDP was larger than expected.
In contrast, in the euro area, evidence suggests slightly slower growth than that incorporated in the April Report.
The Canadian dollar has traded in a range of about 79 to 83 cents US since the time of the April Report, as it has since the beginning of the year.
However, with the US dollar appreciating against other major currencies, the Canadian dollar has risen modestly on a trade-weighted basis.
Yields on short-term government bonds in Canada have remained relatively stable since the April Report, while comparable yields in the United States have moved somewhat higher, reflecting actual and anticipated increases in the federal funds rate.
Long-term government bond yields in both countries have fallen by between 20 and 30 basis points.
This decline has been part of a global phenomenon, with longer-term yields in most industrial countries at very low levels.
While this may partly reflect several technical factors, the low yields would be consistent with strong desired global savings relative to business investment.
Risk premiums on corporate bonds are also very low.
In Canada, solid growth in final domestic demand is expected to continue to contribute importantly to economic activity over the remainder of this year and through 2006.
Various factors suggest further substantial gains in business investment.
These include the high rate of capacity utilization in a number of industries, the global economic expansion and the associated relatively high level of commodity prices, continued favourable financial conditions, buoyant profit levels, and earlier reductions in the prices of imported machinery and equipment.
Following a strong advance in the first quarter of 2005, consumer spending is expected to rise solidly over the projection period.
This reflects further gains in real incomes, the continued effects of past monetary stimulus, and a relatively high level of consumer confidence.
In contrast, investment in housing is expected to be little changed, on balance, over this period.
The current outlook incorporates somewhat higher growth in government spending than in the April Report.
Nevertheless, expenditures by all levels of government are still projected to rise broadly in line with revenues, as governments continue to strive to maintain fiscal balance.
Ongoing solid global economic growth, particularly in the United States, is expected to boost the demand for Canadian exports, while imports will be bolstered by strong investment in machinery and equipment.
The earlier appreciation of the Canadian dollar is expected to continue to dampen Canada's export growth and to stimulate imports, but this effect should lessen considerably next year.
The negative contribution of net exports to real GDP growth appears to have peaked and is expected to fall to zero in 2006.
The Bank's base-case projection calls for economic growth, on an average annual basis, to be 2.7 per cent in 2005 and to rise to 3.3 per cent in 2006.
This outlook for both 2005 and 2006 is essentially the same as in the April Report.
The Bank projects that real GDP growth will increase to about 3 per cent, on average, in the second half of 2005 and 3.4 per cent over the four quarters of 2006.
Based on an assumed rate of growth of potential output of 3 per cent, this outlook implies that the economy will be operating at capacity in the second half of 2006.
Labour productivity in the first quarter of 2005 was up 1 per cent from its year-earlier level, following two years of surprisingly low growth.
While the rebound is encouraging, productivity growth remains below the Bank's assumption for trend growth in productivity of 1.75 per cent.
The Bank will continue to assess productivity developments for indications of growth in potential output.
The factors governing the outlook for inflation are the same as those described in the April Report.
The core rate of inflation is expected to remain close to 1.7 per cent over the remainder of this year.
With the economy projected to operate near its full production capacity, and with inflation expectations remaining well anchored, the core rate is projected to rise gradually to 2 per cent by the end of next year.
Based on an average of recent oil-price futures, total CPI inflation is expected to move up to about 2.5 per cent in late 2005.
By the end of 2006, total CPI inflation is expected to have moved back down to the target rate of 2 per cent.
The global economy has continued to grow at a robust pace since the July Monetary Policy Report Update.
Canada's economic growth in the first half of the year was somewhat stronger than had been expected.
Overall, the economy now appears to be operating at full production capacity.
At the same time, the global and Canadian economies have continued to experience significant movements in energy prices.
While the spikes in crude oil and gasoline prices caused by hurricanes in the Gulf of Mexico have already reversed, prices for natural gas and heating oil, as well as gasoline, are substantially higher than they were at the time of the July Update.
As well, the Canadian dollar has been trading in a higher range against the US dollar since late summer, and has strengthened even further against other major currencies.
This recent strength appears to be underpinned by fundamental factors, including high prices for crude oil and natural gas and Canada's generally solid economic performance.
Past and recent movements in energy prices and in the exchange rate for the Canadian dollar, along with competitive pressures from China and other newly industrialized economies, are giving rise to significant ongoing adjustments in the Canadian economy.
This has resulted in considerable variation in the growth patterns of sectors and regions, making an assessment of overall capacity pressures and of the future growth of potential output particularly complex.
Given these adjustments and the slow growth of productivity in recent years, the Bank has slightly reduced its estimate of potential output growth for 2005 and 2006.
The Bank's base-case projection sees the Canadian economy remaining at capacity through 2007.
Real GDP is expected to grow at about the same pace as potential output over the projection period, averaging 2.8 per cent in 2005, 2.9 per cent in 2006, and 3 per cent the following year.
With the economy operating at capacity and with the increase in energy prices, pressures on consumer prices are somewhat stronger than they were at the time of the July Update.
The annual rate of increase in the consumer price index probably spiked above 3 per cent in September.
On the assumption that energy prices evolve in line with currently prevailing futures prices, CPI inflation is projected to average close to 3 per cent for the rest of 2005 and for the first half of 2006 before returning to the 2 per cent target in the second half.
In contrast, core inflation should remain below 2 per cent in coming months.
But with the economy operating at capacity and longer-term inflation expectations appearing to be well anchored, the Bank expects core inflation to return to 2 per cent by mid-2006.
The Bank's base-case outlook for output and inflation is subject to a number of risks and uncertainties.
Over the next four to six quarters, these risks include the adjustment of the Canadian economy to global developments, uncertainty about the current level and future growth of potential output, and the evolution of energy prices.
But as we look further out to 2007 and beyond, there are increasing risks that the unwinding of global economic imbalances could involve a period of weak global growth.
The Bank raised its key policy interest rate by 25 basis points on 7 September and again on 18 October, bringing it to 3 per cent.
In line with the Bank's outlook, and given that the Canadian economy now appears to be operating at capacity, some further reduction of monetary stimulus will be required to maintain a balance between aggregate supply and demand over the next four to six quarters, and to keep inflation on target.
However, with risks to the global outlook tilted to the downside as we look to 2007 and beyond, the Bank will monitor international developments particularly closely.
More generally, the Bank will continue to assess the adjustments and underlying trends in the Canadian economy, as well as the balance of risks, as it conducts monetary policy to keep inflation on target over the medium term.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI showed considerable volatility over the first eight months of 2005 and averaged just over the Bank's 2 per cent inflation-control target.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI showed marked volatility in the first half of 2005, moving in a range of 1.6 to 2.4 per cent.
This mainly reflected fluctuations in gasoline prices.
Indeed, with the further substantial rise in crude oil prices since late May, total CPI inflation reached 2.6 per cent in August.
It likely spiked above 3 per cent in September as a result of the surge in gasoline prices following disruptions to US refinery production caused by recent hurricanes.
The core rate of inflation was 1.7 per cent in August.
Other measures of the trend rate of inflation that the Bank follows also continued to be below 2 per cent.
Decreases in the global prices of various consumer goods and the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar, which have contributed to declines in the prices of many import-intensive goods, have remained an important source of downward pressure on core inflation so far in 2005.
Fluctuations in motor vehicle prices have accounted for much of the short-term movement in the core rate of inflation.
Real GDP increased at an annual rate of 2.7 per cent in the first half of 2005, faster than expected at the time of the July Update.
The Bank's monitoring of available information and its assessment of the modest adverse economic effects arising from the recent hurricane induced disruption of the US economy point to Canadian GDP growth of about 3 per cent in the third quarter of 2005.
Moreover, net exports were little changed, on balance, following a substantial reduction in the second half of last year.
The recovery in Canada's exports in the first half of the year was supported by strong economic growth in the United States.
Exports of machinery and equipment rose particularly strongly, while exports of automotive products eased.
Imports also rose with the strength in final domestic demand, but were held back by a reduction in inventory investment.
Business capital spending, in contrast, continued to make significant gains during the first half of 2005, with strong investment in structures, as well as in machinery and equipment.
Household expenditures also rose markedly as a result of further gains in real incomes and personal wealth.
Data on narrow money are generally consistent with the Bank's current monitoring of growth in real GDP of about 3 per cent in the third quarter of 2005 and some slowing in the fourth quarter.
The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap suggests that the economy was operating at its production capacity in the second quarter of 2005.
Statistics Canada's measure of capacity utilization in the non-farm, goods-producing sector continues to indicate greater pressure on production capacity than the Bank's conventional estimate of the output gap.
As well, the proportion of companies reporting labour shortages in the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey was well above average, while the percentage of firms reporting difficulties meeting an unanticipated increase in demand was also somewhat higher than average.
The constraints are strongest in the construction, commodity-producing, and transportation services sectors.
The core rate of inflation has remained below 2 per cent since the end of 2003.
Similarly, although some measures of wage increases have picked up, overall, wage gains have continued to be moderate.
In the July Update, the economy was seen as operating a bit below its capacity in mid-2005.
After reviewing all the indicators of capacity pressures, the Governing Council now judges that the economy was operating at its production capacity in mid-2005.
This reflects both faster-than-expected growth in the first half of 2005, and a judgment that the level of potential output is slightly lower than previously assumed.
Companies always face the challenge of adjusting to changes in their economic environment.
Strong competition from newly industrialized economies (particularly China), the appreciation of the Canadian dollar, and rising energy prices have made the adjustment process even sharper than usual.
The resulting large changes in the relative prices of commodities and manufactured goods have given rise to sectoral and regional differences in economic growth.
Capacity constraints are most apparent in Western energy-producing provinces, where increases in oil and gas prices have raised revenues and generated gains in profits and investment.
The sudden expansion in economic activity has created labour shortages - not just in the energy sector, but in other sectors that must compete for the same pool of workers.
Since manufacturing firms export a significant portion of their output, the large appreciation of the Canadian dollar since 2002 has made their goods less competitive.
Adapting to these rapid changes in their competitive position has been difficult for many firms.
Nonetheless, evidence from the Bank's surveys confirms that companies are adjusting to changing economic conditions.
Moreover, the results of the Bank's latest Business Outlook Survey suggest that investment and hiring intentions remain strong across all regions and most sectors, and that, overall, companies remain positive about the outlook.
The underlying rate of increase in wages, based on such measures as the average hourly earnings of permanent workers and hourly labour compensation in the business sector, appears to have been in a range between 2.5 and 3.5 per cent in recent months.
At the same time, the year-to-year gain in hourly labour compensation in the business sector picked up to 2.7 per cent in the second quarter of 2005.
Labour productivity in the second quarter of 2005 was up only 0.6 per cent from its year-earlier level, after two years of virtually no growth.
With this modest increase in productivity over the past year, unit labour costs in the business sector in the second quarter of 2005 were 2 per cent higher than year-earlier levels.
The persistence of the weakness in realized labour productivity growth is increasingly at odds with the Bank's assumption of 1.75 per cent growth in trend labour productivity, which underlies our assumption of 3 per cent growth in potential output.
Weakness in labour productivity growth has been broad based, showing up in the manufacturing, construction, and services sectors.
While a number of sector-specific factors are contributing to this weakness, a common factor may be that the economy has been working through significant adjustments to large changes in relative prices.
Taken together, the observed weakness in labour productivity, the ongoing adjustments across sectors, and the evidence of capacity pressures all suggest that growth in trend labour productivity has been running below 1.75 per cent in the recent period and could take some time to return to that rate.
The year-to-year rise in Canada's terms of trade eased substantially during the first half of 2005, as the global prices of many of Canada's exports of agricultural and industrial commodities stabilized.
As a result, the chain price index for GDP (a broad price measure of the goods and services produced in Canada) rose 2.2 per cent between the second quarter of 2004 and the second quarter of 2005, which was considerably less than the year-to-year gain over much of the preceding year.
The large increase in crude oil prices since the end of 2003 has resulted mainly from a substantial rise in the global demand for energy.
Natural gas prices have surged in recent months, moving from just under US$8 per MMBtu at the time of the July Update, to about US$14 per MMBtu in the 10 days ending on 14 October, owing to hurricane related supply disruptions in US production, as well as the effects of particularly hot summer weather in the United States on electricity demand and, hence, on the demand for natural gas.
Lumber prices have eased as a result of increased supplies.
At the same time, the impact of several strikes constrained supply and contributed to a further rise in metals prices.
The substantial increases in the prices of natural gas and crude oil since mid-2005 are expected to lead to an improvement in Canada's terms of trade and real income, resulting in further pronounced gains in corporate profits.
Since the April Monetary Policy Report, financing conditions have continued to be favourable, and risk premiums have remained low.
Business and household credit continue to advance at a steady pace.
The Canadian dollar has appreciated against the US dollar and other major currencies over the same period.
Business-credit conditions have remained advantageous for borrowers since the April Report, both in Canada and globally.
In financial markets, corporate bond yields and credit spreads have remained low for both investment-grade and non-investment-grade borrowers.
Narrow credit spreads reflect healthy corporate balance sheets, continued investor demand for higher-yielding securities, and a high level of liquidity in global financial markets.
Easy access to capital markets is indicated by the robust growth in the gross issuance of corporate bonds.
Equity markets in the United States are broadly unchanged from the time of the April Report, but most other major equity markets have risen, partly reflecting strong corporate profits.
In Canada, the TSX composite index increased by about 9 per cent, led by gains in energy-sector stocks over the period.
Total business credit continued to grow at about 6 per cent per annum.
One factor driving the demand for credit has been investment to enhance efficiency.
Investments aimed at increasing capacity appear to be primarily in the energy sector.
On the household side, strong consumption and activity in the housing market continue to be supported by rapid growth in total household credit.
Robust employment growth and low interest rates continue to keep household balance sheets healthy, as indicated by a historically low debt-servicing ratio and a low delinquency rate.
Yields on short-term US bonds have risen, while those on longer-term issues have moved up modestly since the April Report.
The increase in yields at the short end mainly reflects increases in the federal funds rate, which now stands at 3.75 per cent.
US federal funds futures currently imply a policy rate of 4.25 per cent by the end of 2005, a level that is modestly higher than was implied by futures prices at the time of the last Report.
The low level of yields on long-term bonds in the United States and in most industrial countries seems to be largely explained by factors pushing up desired global savings relative to business investment.
Canadian policy rates remain below those in the United States.
This has resulted in a wider differential between US and Canadian interest rates across the yield curve.
Yields on two-year Canadian bonds are approximately 80 basis points below those on US Treasuries, compared with 60 points lower at the time of the April Report.
Yield spreads on longer-term bonds have also continued to widen.
After trading in a range of 79 to 83 cents US for most of 2005, the Canadian dollar has been trading in a higher range of 84 to 86 cents US since late summer.
Most other major currencies have weakened against the US dollar over that same period.
As a result, the Canadian dollar has risen more sharply against other major currencies.
The recent strength in the Canadian dollar appears to be underpinned by fundamental factors, including higher energy prices and Canada's generally solid economic performance.
The outlook begins with a base-case projection for the global and Canadian economies and for inflation.
The base case has been developed assuming energy prices consistent with current futures prices; a smooth and orderly resolution of global imbalances over the medium term, involving a modest and gradual further real effective depreciation of the US dollar; and a relatively stable Canada-US exchange rate over the policy horizon.
This is followed by a discussion of the risks surrounding the projection.
These risks are particularly noteworthy as we look to 2007 and beyond, given the uncertainties related to the manner in which global imbalances will be unwound.
In the Bank's base-case projection, the profile for crude oil and natural gas prices is based on current futures prices.
This implies that the price for crude oil will be just below US$65 per barrel through 2006 and 2007.
Natural gas prices are assumed to remain at or above US$10 per MMBtu through 2007Q1 before falling below US$10 per MMBtu through the rest of 2007.
These higher energy prices are expected to have a small restraining effect on both aggregate supply and demand in the global economy.
Real prices for non-energy commodities are assumed to remain near current levels through 2006 and 2007, since supply is expected to expand roughly in line with demand.
The base-case outlook for GDP growth in the United States and in the major overseas economies suggests that the global economy will continue to expand at about 4 per cent per year over the projection horizon.
Economic growth in Asia is expected to remain robust, despite higher energy prices.
The rate of inflation in Japan is expected to turn positive by the end of 2006.
In contrast, growth in euro zone economies remains sluggish and is expected to average 1.2 per cent in 2005, a somewhat weaker performance than anticipated at the time of the last Report.
Economic activity in the euro zone has not been as strong as expected, partly reflecting uncertainty concerning labour market and other structural reforms, as well as higher energy prices.
GDP growth in the euro zone is projected to pick up gradually over the next two years as domestic demand recovers.
Real US GDP expanded at an annual rate of 3.3 per cent in the second quarter of 2005.
Monthly indicators support a further pickup in activity in the third quarter, led by particularly robust housing activity and consumer spending.
The effects of Hurricane Katrina and higher energy prices will, however, have a dampening impact on the US economy for the remainder of this year.
Accordingly, US GDP is expected to grow by 3.5 per cent in 2005, somewhat less than the 3.7 per cent anticipated at the time of the July Update.
Economic activity is expected to pick up slightly in 2006, as the adverse effects of higher energy prices are more than fully offset by increased construction associated with the cleanup and rebuilding of storm-damaged areas.
In 2007, the US economy is expected to slow modestly, as domestic demand retreats, owing to increases in US policy rates and increased household and government savings.
This base-case projection assumes that global imbalances will be resolved over an extended period, with relatively modest year-to-year movements.
Thus, the US current account deficit, which is largely matched by surpluses in Asia and in oil-exporting countries, starts to gradually unwind in 2007.
This unwinding involves increased domestic demand in Asia, Europe, and oil-exporting countries in 2007; an increase in private and public savings in the United States; and a further real effective depreciation of the US dollar, which shifts demand towards US exports and reduces the US demand for foreign imports.
In the base-case projection for Canada, solid growth in final domestic demand is expected to continue to contribute importantly to economic expansion in the second half of 2005 and through 2006 and 2007.
Several factors point to further strong increases in business investment.
These include an expanding global economy and indications that energy and non-energy commodity prices will remain high for some time, the high rate of capacity utilization in a number of capital-intensive industries, continued favourable financial conditions, strong profit levels and balance sheets, and earlier reductions in the prices of imported machinery and equipment.
After a substantial advance in 2005, consumer spending is expected to rise solidly through 2006 and 2007, albeit at a more modest pace than in 2005 and somewhat less than projected in the July Update.
Higher energy prices will tend to dampen consumption growth, as will the slightly lower income growth from the lower assumed profile for potential output.
Nonetheless, still-robust gains in real incomes and relatively low long-term interest rates should help support the pace of consumer spending in 2006 and 2007.
Consumer confidence, which recently fell in the immediate wake of hurricanes in the United States, is expected to recover.
Housing investment is expected to be little changed, on balance, following strong increases in recent years.
The base-case outlook continues to incorporate an assumption of relatively strong growth in total spending on goods and services by all levels of government combined, with overall spending on goods, services, and transfers rising at about the same rate as revenues.
With continued strong growth in the US economy, exports are expected to continue to rise, while strong investment in machinery and equipment will continue to stimulate imports.
The adjustment of exports and imports to the appreciation of the Canadian dollar through 2003 and 2004 is now well advanced.
But, on the assumption that the Canadian dollar continues to trade in its recent range of 84 to 86 cents US, there will be further effects on trade.
While there is considerable uncertainty regarding the speed and magnitude of the effects of exchange rate movements on net exports, on balance, net exports are expected to exert a small drag on overall growth through 2006 and 2007.
This is a somewhat weaker track for net exports in 2006 than that in the July Update, owing largely to the stronger Canadian dollar.
The Bank's base-case projection therefore calls for economic growth, on an average annual basis, to be 2.8 per cent in 2005 rising gradually to 2.9 per cent in 2006 and to 3.0 per cent in 2007.
The outlook for growth is a little higher in 2005 and a little lower in 2006 than at the time of the July Update, reflecting the elimination of the output gap and a modest reduction in the assumed growth rate of potential output through 2005 and 2006.
On a quarterly basis, the Bank projects that real GDP growth will edge down to about 3.0 and 2.7 per cent in the third and fourth quarters of 2005, respectively.
It will then increase modestly to close to 3 per cent over the four quarters of 2006 and through 2007.
This base-case projection incorporates some further reduction in monetary stimulus to maintain a balance between aggregate supply and demand in the Canadian economy and thus keep inflation on target.
The economy continues to operate at about its production capacity throughout the projection horizon.
Although most indicators of near-term inflation expectations that the Bank follows have edged up in recent months, key medium- and longer-term measures remain well anchored to the 2 per cent target.
While 70 per cent of firms in the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey expect CPI inflation to be within a range of 1 to 3 per cent, on average, over the next two years, the percentage of respondents expecting inflation to be above 3 per cent rose appreciably from the preceding survey.
Nevertheless, the average private sector forecast for total CPI inflation over the longer term is near 2 per cent.
Total CPI inflation is projected to average near to 3 per cent for the rest of 2005 and for the first half of 2006, before returning to the 2 per cent target in the second half of 2006.
For the next year or so, total CPI will continue to be importantly affected by recent developments in the market for crude oil, natural gas, gasoline, and heating oil.
While gasoline prices, on a month-to-month basis, are expected to ease somewhat through to early 2006, consumer prices for natural gas are projected to increase considerably over the same period, as recent increases in wholesale prices become reflected in regulated prices and contracts.
Core inflation is projected to continue to average close to 1.6 per cent through to the end of 2005.
The past appreciation of the Canadian dollar, together with expected ongoing reductions in the world prices of some consumer goods (owing to increasing supplies from countries such as China) and some temporary effects related to automobile prices, are exerting some downward pressure on inflation.
With the economy expected to be operating at production capacity and inflation expectations well anchored, total CPI inflation should decrease to the 2 per cent target in the second half of 2006.
The core rate is projected to rise to 2 per cent by mid-2006 and to remain there through 2007, owing to these same factors.
This assumes that there is little pass-through from higher oil and natural gas prices and the recent appreciation of the Canadian dollar into core inflation, consistent with experience in recent years.
Increases in average hourly earnings of permanent workers are expected to rise over the projection period.
At the same time, however, with a significant improvement in the growth of labour productivity, the projected year-to-year increase in unit labour costs over this period, should remain around 2 per cent.
The base-case projection incorporates a number of assumptions: global energy prices evolve in line with current futures prices; productivity growth in Canada continues to recover; there is little feed-through from higher oil and gas prices into core inflation; there is a gradual unwinding of global imbalances; and the Canadian dollar continues to trade in its recent range relative to the US dollar.
Clearly there are risks and uncertainties around each of these assumptions.
Over the next four to six quarters, risks to the base-case projection for Canada appear to be balanced.
There are both upside and downside risks to global economic activity, stemming primarily from future energy prices and the pace of growth in China.
For Canada, these global risks could affect the evolution of net exports, commodity prices, and the exchange rate.
Adjustment to the appreciation of the Canadian dollar, higher commodity prices, and increased competition from China and other newly industrialized economies is so far proceeding in line with expectations.
However, there are still both upside and downside risks to exports and imports as this continuing adjustment unfolds.
The ongoing adjustment and large relative price changes also pose some risks to the outlook for inflation.
While the balance of indicators suggests that the economy is operating at its production potential, sectoral and regional shifts occurring in the Canadian economy make the overall assessment of capacity pressures particularly complex.
With the economy operating at its production potential, there is also the risk that higher energy costs could feed through more broadly to the prices of non-energy goods and services, increasing the upward pressure on inflation.
The risk of this affecting longer-term inflation expectations should be mitigated, however, by monetary policy clearly focused on achieving the 2 per cent target.
Looking to 2007 and beyond, there are risks related to the manner in which global imbalances will be unwound.
The imbalances remain sizable, and the longer they persist without appropriate policy actions being taken, the higher is the risk that their resolution could involve a period of weakness in worldwide aggregate demand.
The principal risk is that, as the savings rates of households and governments begin to rise in the United States, domestic demand elsewhere in the world fails to pick up sufficiently to sustain global demand.
Uncertainty related to structural reform appears to have resulted in increased precautionary savings in significant parts of Europe, while in China the need to self-insure against health risks and to provide for education costs is leading households to save a very large proportion of their income gains.
More recently, higher oil prices are shifting current account surpluses towards oil-exporting countries, which may dampen global demand if these increased oil revenues do not translate sufficiently into increased import demand by these countries.
For the base-case projection to be realized, US consumers and governments need to spend less and save more, and policy actions need to be taken elsewhere to encourage stronger domestic demand.
There is also the risk of an abrupt and disorderly adjustment.
This would likely involve large movements in exchange rates and other asset prices and a sharp slowing in the world economy.
The economic cost for the world economy would be greater if some countries resist fundamental exchange rate movements or if there is a rise in protectionism.
A sharp depreciation of the US dollar against the Canadian dollar, as part of a broader currency adjustment, would further exacerbate the negative impact on the demand for Canadian-produced goods.
Such weaker demand would have implications for the conduct of monetary policy.
The Canadian and global economies are evolving essentially in line with the Bank's expectations.
The outlook for growth and inflation in Canada is similar to that in the October Monetary Policy Report.
Canada's real gross domestic product is expected to have grown at an annual rate of about 3 per cent in the second half of 2005.
The Canadian economy continues to adjust to global developments and to the associated changes in relative prices.
Prices of energy commodities surged in the second half of 2005.
The Canadian dollar has appreciated modestly against the US dollar to a slightly higher range of 85 to 87 cents US.
Reflecting large swings in gasoline prices, total CPI inflation has been volatile, spiking above 3 per cent, as expected, but then reversing more quickly than anticipated.
Core inflation has been quite stable at 1.6 per cent as expected.
While various indicators suggest different degrees of pressure, the Bank continues to judge that the economy is operating at its production capacity.
A solid rate of economic expansion is expected to continue in the United States and in the global economy more broadly.
Against this backdrop, the Bank's base-case projection for Canada calls for strong growth in domestic demand and further gains in exports.
Nevertheless, net exports will likely exert a small drag on growth through 2006 and 2007.
Annual GDP growth is expected to be 3.1 per cent this year and 2.9 per cent in 2007, keeping the economy close to its production capacity.
Total CPI inflation will continue to be affected by the prices of crude oil and natural gas.
The Bank is projecting total inflation of about 2.5 per cent in the first half of 2006, easing to 2 per cent by the first half of 2007.
Core inflation should also return to 2 per cent by the first half of 2007, somewhat later than projected in the October Report, owing largely to more persistent downward pressure from import prices.
The risks to the base-case projection remain balanced for 2006 and tilted to the downside through 2007 and beyond.
The Bank raised its key policy interest rate by 25 basis points at each of the last four fixed announcement dates, bringing the target for the overnight rate to 3.5 per cent.
In line with the Bank's base-case projection and the current assessment of risks, some modest further increase in the policy interest rate would be required to keep aggregate supply and demand in balance and inflation on target over the medium term.
In 2005, the global economy continued to exhibit robust growth.
In the United States, recent indicators suggest that real GDP growth was 3.6 per cent in 2005, just above the 3.5 per cent projected in the October Report.
When combined with continued strong economic growth in China and some pickup in domestic demand in Japan, global GDP growth for 2005 is likely to have averaged just over 4 per cent.
In the second half of 2005, the Canadian economy continued to make significant adjustments to global developments and to the associated changes in relative prices.
These include strong world economic growth, the high level of commodity prices, declining prices for many manufactured goods, and the appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
Particularly noteworthy was a substantial rise in Canada's terms of trade (the price of exports relative to the price of imports), chiefly reflecting the surge in the prices of energy commodities and products.
On a year-over-year basis, the terms of trade were up 4.4 per cent in the third quarter of 2005, and recent indicators suggest that they continued to rise in the fourth quarter.
As a result, real income increased more rapidly than real output (measured by real GDP).
This showed up in gains in corporate profits, labour income, and government revenues, and in a surge in the equity values of energy and mining companies.
Continued strong growth in the global economy, combined with higher export prices, appears to have supported substantial gains in capital spending by businesses and in export volumes.
While the pace of household consumption eased somewhat in the second half of 2005, it remained an important contributor to the considerable growth in domestic demand over the period.
Overall, Canada's real GDP is expected to have grown at an annual rate of about 3 per cent in the second half of 2005.
This implies that the level of activity at year-end was close to that projected in the October Report.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI continued to exhibit marked volatility in the last four months of 2005.
As expected, total CPI inflation spiked above 3 per cent in September with the temporary surge in gasoline prices that followed disruptions to US production from hurricane damage.
In the fourth quarter of 2005, total CPI inflation, at 2.3 per cent, was lower than expected in the October Report.
This chiefly reflected a quicker-than-expected reversal of the earlier spike in gasoline prices caused by somewhat lower prices for crude oil and a faster return of profit margins to more normal levels.
In contrast, the core rate of inflation remained quite stable.
Even as the economy appeared to be operating at its production capacity in the fourth quarter, the core CPI was up 1.6 per cent from a year earlier, unchanged from its rate in the previous two quarters.
Decreases in the prices of many import-intensive goods continued to exert downward pressure on the core rate, reflecting the combined effect of declines in the world prices of many manufactured goods and the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
There has been no evidence that higher energy prices have fed through broadly to core inflation.
The underlying rate of increase in wages appears to have moved up to a range between 3.5 and 4 per cent since mid-2005.
Unit labour costs in the business sector in the third quarter of 2005 were 2.6 per cent higher than year-earlier levels.
Various indicators suggest somewhat different degrees of pressure on production capacity.
Statistics Canada's measure of capacity utilization in the non-farm, goods-producing sector continues to suggest marked pressure on production capacity.
In the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey, the percentage of firms reporting pressures on production capacity or labour shortages remained well above average.
While capacity constraints are most apparent in Western Canada, a number of firms in the rest of the country report that they are more fully utilizing their existing capacity.
At the same time, the Bank's conventional measure of the output gap indicates that the economy was operating at its production capacity at the end of 2005.
A number of labour market indicators suggest that the economy has been operating close to potential.
In particular, increases in labour costs now appear to be more consistent with the economy being close to its production capacity than was the case at the time of the last Report.
The core rate of inflation points to less pressure on capacity.
It has continued to stay below 2 per cent since the end of 2003.
It is the Governing Council's judgment, after reviewing all the indicators of capacity pressures, that the economy was operating at its production capacity at the end of 2005.
The Canadian dollar has appreciated modestly against the US dollar since the October Report and has moved from the range of 84 to 86 cents US, which had been in place since September 2005, to a slightly higher range of 85 to 87 cents US.
The Canadian dollar was essentially unchanged against most other major currencies over this period.
Robust commodity prices continue to contribute to the strength of the Canadian dollar.
Financial conditions in Canada remain favourable.
Yields on corporate bonds remain low, equity markets have improved over recent months, and market volatility is low.
The Bank's base-case projection continues to incorporate the following key assumptions: energy prices consistent with current futures prices; a smooth and orderly resolution of global imbalances over the medium term, including a modest and gradual further real effective depreciation of the US dollar; and a Canada/US exchange rate in its current range of 85 to 87 cents US.
Growth in the global economy is expected to remain robust at just over 4 per cent in 2006 and about 4 per cent in 2007.
This reflects continued economic strength in Asia, a gradual pickup in Europe, and solid growth in the United States.
The outlook for the US economy is similar to that in the October Report.
With post-hurricane rebuilding and the recovery in consumer confidence, real GDP growth is expected to be 3.6 and 3.1 per cent in 2006 and 2007, respectively.
Prices for both crude oil and natural gas have been quite volatile since mid-October.
Futures prices suggest that oil will average just above US$65 per barrel over the projection period and that natural gas prices will average close to US$10 per MMBtu.
Real prices for non-energy commodities are expected to remain near current levels through 2006 and 2007.
Together with the assumptions for the prices of energy commodities, this implies that Canada's terms of trade will stay close to the high level reached in the second half of 2005.
Against this backdrop, the base-case projection for Canada calls for solid growth in final domestic demand to continue to contribute importantly to economic expansion through 2006 and 2007.
In particular, business investment is projected to grow strongly, owing to a number of factors including the global economic expansion and expectations of persistently high commodity prices.
Following a substantial increase in 2005, consumer spending is also expected to rise solidly over the projection period.
This would chiefly reflect relatively robust gains in real incomes.
In contrast, investment in housing is expected to ease slightly, after strong increases in recent years.
Growth in spending on goods and services by all levels of government combined is assumed to be strong, with overall expenditures on goods, services, and transfers increasing broadly in line with revenues.
Exports are projected to rise further as a result of the continued expansion of the US economy, while further marked gains in investment in machinery and equipment should continue to stimulate imports.
Although the adjustment of net exports to the rise of the Canadian dollar through 2003 and 2004 seems to be well advanced, the subsequent strengthening of the Canadian exchange rate is expected to result in net exports exerting a modest drag on overall growth through 2006 and 2007.
The Bank's base-case projection calls for economic growth of 3.1 per cent in 2006 and 2.9 per cent in 2007, similar to that in the October Report.
Growth in potential output continues to be projected at 2.9 per cent in 2006 and 3.0 per cent in 2007.
This growth profile implies that the economy would be in slight excess demand in 2006, returning to its production capacity by the end of 2007.
In this base-case projection, two factors contribute to bringing aggregate supply and demand back into balance next year: the effect of higher short-term interest rates and a projected slowing of the US economy.
With the economy pressing against its production capacity and with inflation expectations well anchored, the core rate of inflation is projected to increase to 2 per cent by the first half of 2007.
This is somewhat later than projected in the October Report, reflecting the impact on consumer prices of more persistent declines than previously anticipated in the Canadian-dollar prices of many manufactured goods.
The outlook for the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI will continue to be importantly affected by developments in the markets for crude oil and natural gas.
Total CPI inflation is expected to be about 2.5 per cent in the first half of 2006 before returning to the 2 per cent target by the first half of 2007.
Risks to the base-case projection for Canada still appear to be balanced for 2006, with both upside and downside risks to global economic growth.
Through 2007 and beyond, risks are tilted to the downside.
Should the unwinding of global imbalances involve a slowdown in world economic activity, it would imply lower net export volumes, lower commodity prices, and less growth in business investment for Canada than in the base-case projection.
If there were also a pronounced depreciation of the US dollar against the Canadian dollar as part of a broader adjustment in currencies, then the negative impact on the demand for Canadian products would be greater.
In addition to these risks, there continue to be uncertainties about the overall assessment of capacity pressures and their effect on inflation, owing to the large sectoral and regional shifts under way in the Canadian economy.
The Bank is monitoring this closely.
The Canadian economy continues to grow at a solid pace, consistent with the Bank's outlook in the January Monetary Policy Report Update.
The global economy has been robust, showing a little more momentum than had been anticipated.
This has led to higher prices for many commodities which, along with strong domestic demand, have supported economic activity in Canada.
All factors considered, the Canadian economy is judged to be operating at, or just above, its production capacity.
High and variable energy prices associated with the strength of global demand have kept total CPI inflation above the Bank's 2 per cent target.
Core inflation has remained below 2 per cent, owing to persistent downward pressure from the prices of imported consumer goods.
Against this backdrop, the Bank raised its policy interest rate by one-quarter of one percentage point on 7 March and again on 25 April, bringing it to 4.0 per cent.
Canada's GDP is projected to grow by 3.1 per cent in 2006, in line with expectations in the January Update, and by 3.0 per cent in 2007, slightly stronger than previously expected.
Growth in 2008 is expected to be 2.9 per cent.
The Canadian economy is projected to operate slightly above its capacity through 2006 and to return to capacity by the end of 2008.
Total CPI inflation will continue to be volatile, affected by the evolution of energy prices.
Upward pressure on inflation from excess demand in the economy is offset by downward pressure from the declining prices of many imported consumer goods.
Core inflation is projected to rise to 2 per cent in the second half of this year and remain there through the end of 2008.
There are both upside and downside risks to the Bank's projection for growth and inflation.
In the Bank's view, these risks are roughly balanced with a small tilt to the downside later in the projection period.
In line with the Bank's outlook for the Canadian economy, some modest further increase in the policy interest rate may be required to keep aggregate supply and demand in balance and inflation on target over the medium term.
The Bank will closely monitor evolving developments in the Canadian economy in light of the cumulative increase in the policy interest rate since last September.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was somewhat higher than the Bank's 2 per cent inflation-control target, averaging 2.5 per cent for the period between September 2005 and March 2006.
This chiefly reflected considerable increases in energy prices at the consumer level.
On the other hand, the core rate of inflation averaged 1.7 per cent over the same period, reflecting continued downward pressure from import prices.
The inflation rate for the total CPI has been quite volatile, moving in a range between 2.0 and 3.4 per cent since the October Monetary Policy Report.
This was caused by ongoing fluctuations in gasoline prices and marked increases in consumer prices for natural gas.
The core rate of inflation has remained very stable in recent months at about 1.7 per cent.
Other measures of the trend rate of inflation that the Bank follows have also remained below 2 per cent.
Although the Canadian economy has been operating close to its full production capacity since the second quarter of 2004, the prices of many import-intensive goods have continued to fall, reflecting declines in the world prices of many manufactured goods and the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
This continued to put downward pressure on core inflation.
There has been relatively little evidence that higher energy costs are being passed more generally to the prices of other goods and services.
In the second half of 2005 and into early 2006, the Canadian economy continued to grow steadily, even as it underwent significant adjustments in response to global developments and associated changes in relative prices.
These developments included strong world economic growth, high and volatile energy prices, high price levels for many other commodities, declining prices for many manufactured goods, and the appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
With this improvement, real income rose more rapidly than real output (measured by real GDP), as evidenced by substantial gains in corporate profits, labour income, and government revenues.
Canada's real GDP grew at an annual rate of 3 per cent in the second half of 2005, as expected at the time of the January Update.
Consequently, the level of economic activity at the end of last year was very close to what had been anticipated.
Based on available indicators, it appears that real GDP grew by about 3.2 per cent in the first quarter of 2006, driven by many of the same factors that were evident through the second half of last year.
Final domestic demand continued to contribute significantly to GDP growth in the second half of 2005, while net exports were little changed over the period.
Businesses, facing competitive pressures to reduce costs and increase productivity in some instances, and capacity constraints in others, undertook further sizable increases in capital spending.
These increases were supported by strong overall profitability, ongoing reductions in the prices of imported machinery and equipment, and favourable financing conditions.
The growth of household expenditures eased somewhat over this period, following a marked increase in the first half of 2005.
Indeed, export growth strengthened appreciably in the second half of 2005, owing largely to a recovery in exports of automotive products.
At the same time, import growth also picked up, boosted by the considerable growth in final domestic demand.
High global prices for energy commodities and metals helped to maintain very high levels of profitability in oil and gas extraction, mining, and related processing industries during the second half of 2005 and into 2006.
Production in these industries also picked up noticeably in the second half of 2005, having been held back earlier in the year by temporary disruptions.
As a result, capital spending has strengthened appreciably, and plans indicate further strong gains in investment spending for this year.
While the economic impact of higher capital spending by energy-related firms is most apparent in Western energy-producing provinces, some activity in other provinces is also being generated by related purchases of goods and services.
In most sectors with a low exposure to foreign competition, such as construction and wholesale and retail trade, profitability remained strong in the second half of 2005.
Output rose solidly, bolstered by strong gains in final domestic demand and, in some cases, lower costs for imported products.
Over the same period, profitability weakened in many parts of the manufacturing sector because of the continuing impact of the strong Canadian dollar, higher energy costs, and strong competition from emerging economies (especially China).
As a result, employment in manufacturing has continued to fall considerably as many firms restructured their operations.
To further improve productivity and decrease costs, manufacturers increased capital spending substantially in 2005, and additional investment is expected this year.
With these various initiatives, manufacturing productivity rose by some 6.5 per cent at an annual rate between the second and fourth quarters of 2005.
Thus, output continued to increase even as employment in the manufacturing sector declined.
Most of the indicators of capacity pressures suggest that the economy was operating at or above its production capacity in the first quarter of 2006.
In the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey, the percentage of firms reporting labour shortages or difficulties meeting an unanticipated increase in demand remained above average, although there was some easing from the preceding survey.
The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap also suggests that the economy was operating slightly above its potential in early 2006.
Statistics Canada's measure of capacity utilization in the non-farm, goods-producing sector has been indicating considerable pressure on production capacity for some time.
Labour market indicators suggest, in general, that the economy is operating close to potential.
Wage developments and the recent evidence of a pickup in labour productivity growth are discussed in the next section of this report.
In contrast, core inflation seems to be pointing to less pressure on capacity, having stayed below 2 per cent since the end of 2003.
As noted earlier in this report, however, the downward pressure on the core rate has also reflected ongoing reductions in the prices of many finished manufactured goods partly related to new production in Asia.
And total CPI inflation has been running above 2 per cent, largely reflecting tightness in global energy markets that is also partly related to the strong economic growth in Asia.
On balance, the information from consumer prices does not provide much evidence of excess supply.
Based on a review of all the indicators of capacity pressures, it is the judgment of the Governing Council that the Canadian economy was operating at, or just above, its production capacity in early 2006.
Growth in aggregate wages picked up in the second half of 2005 after several years of subdued gains, although it appears that the rate of increase eased somewhat in early 2006.
A good indicator of the underlying trend in wages is the average hourly wages of permanent workers reported in the Labour Force Survey.
That measure indicates that the rate of increase in aggregate wages has ranged between 3 and 3 3/4 per cent since mid-2005.
Wage increases in oil - and gas-producing provinces continue to be conspicuously higher than those in other parts of the country.
This reflects the differing pressures in labour markets, which have encouraged workers to move - or commute - to Alberta from other provinces.
After a two-year period of essentially no change, labour productivity growth accelerated in the second half of 2005, with productivity in the fourth quarter up 1.5 per cent from a year earlier.
This brought it closer to the Bank's assumption for trend labour productivity growth over the longer term of about 1.75 per cent.
At the sectoral level, strong productivity growth broadened beyond manufacturing and wholesale trade to include transportation and warehousing, information and cultural industries, and accommodation and food services.
Together with the recovery in aggregate productivity growth, this evidence of broadening is particularly encouraging.
The data also show a rise of 5 per cent in hourly labour compensation over the past year, and - after productivity gains are taken into account - a 3.5 per cent rise in unit labour costs in the year ending in the fourth quarter of 2005.
This result, however, was boosted by unusually large one-time payments, such as bonuses and commissions.
Underlying labour compensation gains of 3 to 3.75 per cent and productivity growth of 1.5 per cent, are consistent with increases in unit labour costs close to 2 per cent.
The price for light crude oil (West Texas Intermediate), which was US$65 per barrel at the time of the January Update, averaged US$70 in the ten days ending on 21 April 2006.
Prices for Canadian heavy crude oil, which had been considerably weaker since late 2005, have rebounded markedly so far in April.
Over the past three months, natural gas prices have fallen to about $7 per MMBtu, considerably below the levels estimated last autumn.
Metals prices, in particular, saw substantial gains, driven by the combination of robust global demand and constrained supply.
As a result, nominal GDP rose by a marked 7.1 per cent over the same period.
The strong growth in real income provided considerable support for the substantial advance in final domestic demand.
The recent decline in the price of natural gas is expected to contribute to a modest reduction in early 2006 in Canada's terms of trade and, thus, in the growth of nominal GDP.
Over the past six months, policy rates in a number of the industrialized countries have moved higher, against the background of continued strength in the global economy.
The US Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank, and the Bank of Canada have raised their respective policy rates, while the Bank of Japan has recently announced the gradual removal of its policy of quantitative easing.
Financial market expectations of short-term interest rates have tended to move up since the Update, consistent with favourable economic developments.
Higher actual and expected policy rates in most industrial countries helped push up yields on longer-term bonds.
Long-term yields had been particularly low, partly because of technical demand factors, as well as the global imbalance between desired savings and desired investment.
Yields on Canadian bonds have also trended upwards since the last Update.
However, the spread between the yields on US and Canadian bonds has widened across all maturities since January, as the yields on US government bonds of comparable maturities moved up by more.
The Canadian dollar has been relatively firm against most major currencies since the January Update, and it has traded in a slightly higher and wider range against the US dollar (roughly 85 1/2 to 88 1/2 cents US) than was noted at that time.
Fundamental factors such as rising commodity prices, particularly prices for energy and metals, have continued to support the Canadian dollar over the period, largely offsetting the impact of negative Canada-US interest rate differentials.
Credit spreads on corporate bonds have remained low in recent months, but because interest rates have been higher on Canadian government bonds, firms generally face modestly higher borrowing costs than at the time of the October Report.
Despite this rise, business credit conditions continue to be very favourable.
Supported by record profit margins, corporate balance sheets have continued to improve, with non-financial firms now holding historically high cash balances, particularly those in the resource-related sector concentrated in Western Canada.
These robust financial conditions augur well for continued strong investment by businesses.
The growth in household borrowing has continued to trend upwards since the October Report, largely reflecting strong activity in the housing market.
With home resales and housing starts showing renewed vigour, the growth of mortgage credit is accelerating.
In addition, rising house prices and financial innovation continue to bolster consumer borrowing secured by home equity, either through mortgage refinancing or through home-equity lines of credit.
These home-equity withdrawals have provided support to recent household spending.
Strong credit growth is expected to continue to support expenditures on housing and consumption through the first half of 2006.
Since the October Report, growth in narrow money (M1+) has picked up, largely owing to stronger business deposits.
This stronger growth suggests some pickup in real output growth in the first half of 2006.
Over the same period, growth of broad money (M2++) has also picked up slightly, which is consistent with a modest rise in core inflation through 2006.
This section sets out the base-case projection for the global economy through to the end of 2008, followed by the corresponding base-case projection for the Canadian economy.
The base-case projection has been developed assuming a smooth and orderly resolution of global imbalances involving supportive policy actions to rebalance global demand and a gradual real effective depreciation of the US dollar.
Energy prices are assumed to be consistent with current futures prices.
Global output rose 4.7 per cent in 2005, which was somewhat higher than expected, with most major overseas economies participating in the expansion.
After another strong year in 2006, growth in the global economy is expected to ease somewhat in 2007 and 2008 as excess capacity becomes more fully utilized.
Despite the robust global economic expansion and higher energy prices, there are, as yet, few signs of a buildup of underlying inflationary pressures at the consumer level.
Monetary authorities in many countries have already taken policy actions to promote sustainable, non-inflationary growth.
Revisions to the Chinese national accounts suggest that growth in the service sector in China has been substantially higher than earlier reported.
Over the projection horizon, economic growth in China is expected to continue at a strong though slightly more moderate pace, with a shift in the composition of demand towards private consumption.
Economic growth in Japan has also been stronger and more broadly based than anticipated in earlier Reports.
The Japanese economy advanced 2.7 per cent in 2005, led by growth in investment and household spending, although export growth also remains robust.
In 2006, economic growth in Japan is expected to strengthen further, driven largely by domestic demand, before easing to a rate consistent with the growth of production capacity in subsequent years.
Economic growth in the European Union continues to be modest, although somewhat better than anticipated in the October Report, at 1.5 per cent for 2005.
Business surveys point to further improvement ahead, and accommodative monetary conditions should continue to support a gradual expansion going forward.
In the United States, real GDP expanded by 3.5 per cent in 2005, with economic activity slowing more than expected towards the end of the year.
Partly related to post-hurricane rebuilding, business investment remains supportive of growth in 2006.
Overall, inflationary pressures have remained relatively contained in the United States, despite high and volatile energy prices.
The US economy is expected to continue to expand strongly in 2006, with real GDP growth of 3.5 per cent.
Growth is then expected to moderate to 3.2 per cent in 2007 and to 3.1 per cent in 2008.
This is largely due to a levelling off in the housing market, higher interest rates, and some fiscal consolidation, all of which should contribute to a slowing in consumer spending.
Futures prices for crude oil for the remainder of 2006 and through 2007 are higher than those in the January Update, while those for natural gas are slightly lower (ranging from US$8 to US$11.50 per MMBtu) over the remainder of this year and largely unchanged for 2007.
The Bank incorporates these futures prices for energy as the assumptions underlying its base-case projection.
Prices for non-energy commodities are generally assumed to remain firm, consistent with sustained global growth.
The global outlook in this base-case projection involves an orderly resolution of global imbalances stemming from policies to rebalance global demand and market led adjustments, including a gradual real effective depreciation of the US dollar.
The rebalancing is supported by a reduction in the US fiscal deficit and policies that support domestic demand growth elsewhere, including ongoing structural reform in Europe and Asia.
The weaker US dollar, combined with a rise in US long-term interest rates, is expected to lend support to the rotation in the composition of US aggregate demand growth away from domestic sources to external ones.
The exchange rate adjustment envisaged in the base-case projection involves a depreciation of the US real effective exchange rate of about 7 per cent by the end of the projection horizon.
At the same time, the currencies of emerging Asia, Japan, and some of the oil-exporting countries, which did not experience a significant real appreciation in 2002 to 2004, are expected to appreciate the most against the US dollar.
It is assumed in the base-case projection that only a small fraction of this US-dollar depreciation will be against the Canadian dollar, and will occur late in the projection period.
This scenario of strong global growth with a gradual rebalancing of demand is broadly supportive of continued economic expansion in Canada, but the primary engine of growth in Canada is expected to continue to be growth in final domestic demand.
Factors contributing to further substantial gains in capital spending this year and next include the ongoing global economic expansion, expectations of relatively high levels for commodity prices, continued strong profits overall, very solid balance sheets, and declining prices for imported machinery and equipment.
Consumer spending is expected to rise solidly over the projection period, reflecting further substantial gains in real disposable incomes.
After considerable increases in recent years, housing investment is expected to rise a little further this year, and is, indeed, somewhat stronger than projected in the January Update.
Investment in housing is then expected to ease slightly through 2007 and 2008.
Overall, government spending on goods, services, and transfers is assumed to increase at about the same rate as revenues over the projection period.
Accordingly, growth in expenditures by all levels of government combined is projected to be quite strong in 2006 and 2007, before easing somewhat in 2008.
Exports are projected to rise further as a result of the continued global economic expansion and significant additions to the production capacity for commodities in Canada.
At the same time, further increases in investment in machinery and equipment should boost imports.
Accordingly, net exports are still expected to exert a small drag on overall growth for some time, with the effect diminishing over the projection horizon.
The Bank's base-case projection calls for annual average GDP growth to be 3.1 per cent in 2006, 3 per cent in 2007, and 2.9 per cent in 2008.
The assumption for potential output growth is 2.9 per cent in 2006 and 3.0 per cent in 2007 and 2008.
This implies that the economy would be in slight excess demand in 2006, before returning to potential output by the end of the projection period.
In the base-case projection, the slowing in US economic growth, combined with the lagged effects of past interest rate increases, as well as some modest further increase in interest rates across the yield curve, will bring aggregate demand and supply back into balance.
After edging up at the time of the October Report, most indicators of near-term inflation expectations that the Bank follows have eased back recently.
As well, key medium - and longer-term measures continue to be well anchored to the 2 per cent target.
In the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey, 78 per cent of firms expected total CPI inflation to be within a range of 1 to 3 per cent, on average, over the next two years, and the percentage of respondents expecting inflation to be above 3 per cent has decreased from the autumn survey.
Moreover, the average private sector forecast for total CPI inflation in both 2006 and 2007 is just under 2 per cent, while consensus forecasts of inflation over the longer term continue to be near 2 per cent.
Total CPI inflation is projected to average about 2.5 per cent in the first half of 2006 and to average close to 2.0 per cent through 2007 and 2008 (excluding the effect of any changes in the GST).
Movements in the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI will be importantly affected by developments in the markets for crude oil and natural gas.
Consumer prices for natural gas are projected to decrease substantially over the remainder of 2006, as the recent downturn in wholesale prices becomes more fully reflected in regulated prices and contracts.
Note also that, total CPI inflation may fall temporarily well below 2 per cent in September 2006, since there was a surge in energy prices a year earlier, following disruptions to US production from hurricane damage.
This outlook for inflation does not take into account the federal government's announced intention to cut the Goods and Services Tax this year from 7 per cent to 6 per cent.
The Bank estimates that this one-percentage-point cut in the GST will result in a direct reduction of about 0.6 per cent in the CPI in the month of its implementation.
This will cause a reduction of 0.6 percentage points in the year-over-year rate of change in the CPI for the 12 months following implementation.
With inflation expectations well anchored, the Bank does not expect second-round effects on inflation from the change.
Core inflation should remain below 2 per cent through the first half of 2006, but rise to 2 per cent in the second half of this year, earlier than expected in the January Update, owing to increases in electricity prices.
Ongoing downward pressure on core inflation from reductions in the prices of manufactured goods should be offset by the upward pressure on inflation coming from the economy operating with slight excess demand.
These offsetting factors are projected to diminish in tandem over the projection period, leaving core inflation at 2 per cent.
Increases in labour compensation are expected to move up close to 4 per cent over the projection period.
At the same time, with a further modest gain in the growth of labour productivity, the projected year-to-year increase in unit labour costs should be close to 2 per cent.
There are both upside and downside risks to the Bank's base-case projection.
In the main, the Bank judges that the risks are roughly balanced.
However, there remains a small risk of a disorderly correction of global imbalances, which tilts the risks to the downside later in the projection period.
This risk appears to have lower probability than previously judged, given the tentative signs of policy adjustments and of rotation in global demand.
The upside risks for economic growth and inflation in Canada relate largely to the momentum of the global economy and the associated future path of commodity prices.
This risk, together with geopolitical tensions and possible delays in bringing new supplies online, could push commodity prices still higher.
For Canada, this would imply stronger export demand and higher prices for our commodity exports, stronger income growth, and upward pressure on the Canadian dollar.
Stronger global growth could also put pressure on global production capacity.
This could reduce the pace of price declines for many tradable manufactured goods, thereby adding upward pressure to the base-case projection of inflation in Canada.
The possibility that the US economy could slow more abruptly than anticipated represents an important downside risk for the Canadian economy.
This risk could materialize in several ways.
US households could reduce their demand for housing and motor vehicles and attempt to rebuild savings more quickly than projected.
This would negatively affect Canadian exports.
A weaker US economy could also come about as part of an adjustment to global imbalances that entailed weaker growth in the rest of the world and an associated decline in commodity prices.
More generally, linked to global imbalances is the risk that the real effective depreciation of the US dollar may come more against the Canadian dollar than assumed, exerting renewed drag on net exports and dampening growth in Canada.
There also continues to be uncertainty about the level and growth of potential output in Canada.
There is a possibility that productivity growth will be higher than assumed in the base-case projection, given the productivity-enhancing investments being made by firms and changes in work processes to deal with labour shortages.
At the same time, the large sectoral and regional adjustments still under way in response to key relative price movements continue to make assessments about the level of capacity particularly difficult.
Overall, the outlook for economic growth and inflation in Canada is largely unchanged from that set out in the April Monetary Policy Report.
Growth in the first half of 2006 appears to have been a little stronger, and the Canadian dollar has traded in a higher range than envisaged in the last Report.
As well, there was a further shift in the composition of demand towards consumption and away from exports.
This additional strength in domestic demand is expected to persist into next year, but it should be more than offset by a weaker outlook for net exports, owing primarily to the recent strength in the Canadian dollar.
Hence, in aggregate, growth in 2007-08 is expected to be a little weaker than projected in April.
The economy is currently judged to be operating just above its production capacity.
With some anticipated moderation in US economic growth, combined with past interest rate and exchange rate increases, the Canadian economy is projected to return to its production capacity by the end of 2008.
The Bank projects real GDP growth of 3.2 per cent in 2006, 2.9 per cent in 2007, and 2.8 per cent in 2008.
Total CPI inflation is expected to average just over 1 1/2 per cent from mid-2006 to mid-2007, with the reduction in the Goods and Services Tax lowering the inflation rate by 0.6 percentage points over this period.
Inflation should then return to the 2 per cent target and remain there.
Core inflation (which excludes the effect of changes in indirect taxes, as well as eight of the most volatile CPI components) should remain at about 2 per cent throughout the projection period.
Since the April Report, world economic developments have generally been in line with our base-case assumption of an orderly resolution of global imbalances.
Some rotation in global demand is becoming evident, with stronger domestic demand in Europe and Japan, weaker consumption in the United States, and some further real effective depreciation of the US dollar.
There are important upside and downside risks to the projection, but the Bank continues to judge that these risks are roughly balanced.
The upside risks to Canadian output and inflation relate primarily to the momentum in household spending and housing prices.
The main downside risk for Canada is that the US economy could slow more rapidly than expected, reducing demand for Canadian exports.
Because of the possibility of a disorderly resolution of global current account imbalances, the balance of risks is tilted slightly to the downside later in the projection period.
The Bank of Canada raised the target for the overnight rate by 25 basis points to 4.25 per cent in late May.
On 11 July, the target rate was left unchanged.
The current level of the policy rate is judged, at this time, to be consistent with achieving the inflation target over the medium term.
The Bank will monitor global and domestic economic and financial developments, including adjustments in the Canadian economy, relative to its projection.
The global economic expansion remains robust, with growth in China and the euro zone over the past few months slightly stronger than expected.
Economic activity in the United States is unfolding largely as anticipated.
Real GDP growth has been strong over the past year, growing faster than potential output on average.
The US economy appears to be operating close to its potential, and recent indicators suggest that real GDP growth is moderating, particularly growth in residential investment and consumer spending.
Measures of inflation in the United States have moved slightly higher than expected, apparently reflecting a stronger response to continued strong growth, the cumulative increase in commodity prices, and the sizable real effective depreciation of the US dollar since 2002.
In response to the evolving global situation, a number of major central banks have continued to tighten their monetary policy since the April Report.
The US Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank, among others, have raised their respective policy rates.
The Bank of Japan has continued to gradually exit its quantitative easing policy.
Partly associated with the global rise in interest rates, equity markets in many countries declined in the past few months.
However, the largest declines in prices occurred in markets that had experienced significant gains in the first four months of 2006.
Volatility in markets rose but has since subsided.
Despite the substantial swings in the prices of metals and other commodities, the overall level of commodity prices at mid-2006 remained at about the level expected at the time of the last Report.
Since that Report, the Canadian dollar has moved up against the US dollar into a range of about 88.5 to 91.5 cents US from a range of about 85.5 to 88.5 cents US.
Canada's real GDP appears to have grown a little faster than expected in the first half of 2006.
The economy continued to adjust to global developments that included continuing high prices for many of the commodities that Canada exports and a strong Canadian dollar.
Real GDP rose at an annual rate of 3.8 per cent in the first quarter of 2006, higher than the 3.2 per cent expected in the April Report.
Final domestic demand remained the major contributor to GDP growth.
The Bank's monitoring of available information points to real GDP growth of about 3.2 per cent in the second quarter, as previously anticipated.
Monthly information indicates that consumer spending has been growing faster than expected as a result of further substantial increases in employment, real personal disposable income, and household net worth.
This development is also consistent with continued strong growth in household credit.
This additional strength in consumer spending appears to have been offset by greater-than-projected weakness in merchandise export volumes during the same period.
The stronger economic growth in the first half of the year means that, at mid-year, the level of activity and the estimated degree of pressure on production capacity are marginally higher than projected in the April Report.
The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap, which is surrounded by a wide confidence interval, suggests that the economy was operating about 0.4 per cent above its production potential in the second quarter.
In the Bank's summer Business Outlook Survey, the percentage of companies reporting difficulties in meeting an unanticipated increase in demand remained above average.
The employment-to-population ratio reached a record high in May 2006, and the unemployment rate fell to its lowest level since the mid-1970s.
This tightness in labour markets is, however, less evident in wage developments.
The underlying trend in wage increases has fluctuated between 3 per cent and 4 per cent over the past year and, with trend productivity growth close to 1.75 per cent, underlying increases in unit labour costs appear to be about 2 per cent.
After reviewing all the indicators of capacity pressures, it is the Governing Council's judgment that the economy was operating just above its production capacity in the second quarter of 2006.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI continued to be above the Bank's 2 per cent inflation-control target, averaging 2.6 per cent in April and May of 2006.
Once again, this resulted mainly from substantial increases in energy prices at the consumer level.
In contrast, the core rate of inflation remained below 2 per cent in the first four months of 2006, before moving up to 2 per cent in May - slightly sooner than expected.
The rate of increase in the price of shelter for homeowners has picked up since early this year because of higher prices for new housing.
The rate of increase in the prices of other services has also strengthened.
At the same time, the prices of many import-intensive goods have continued to come under downward pressure from decreases in the world prices of many manufactured goods and from the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
The Bank's base-case projection assumes energy prices consistent with current futures prices, as well as a smooth and orderly resolution of global imbalances, resulting from supportive policy actions to rebalance global demand combined with a gradual real effective depreciation of the US dollar.
Global economic growth in 2006 is now expected to be 4.9 per cent, slightly stronger than the 4.8 per cent anticipated at the time of the last Report.
The current momentum in global economic activity is projected to ease gradually, with global economic growth slowing to 4.6 per cent in 2007 and 4.4 per cent in 2008, more in line with growth in world production potential.
Consistent with the April Report, real GDP growth in the United States is expected to average 3.5 per cent in 2006, before moderating to a rate close to potential growth of about 3.2 per cent in 2007 and 2008.
Housing activity and growth in consumption are projected to slow as part of a rotation in the source of growth away from domestic demand and towards exports.
Prices for crude oil futures over the projection period are slightly higher than those in the April Report, averaging just over US$74 per barrel, while those for natural gas are somewhat lower.
The price index for non-energy commodities is expected to ease over the projection period from the high levels reached in the second quarter of 2006, largely as a result of declines in metals prices as increases in world supply become more evident.
Nevertheless, the projected level of non-energy commodity prices remains high relative to historical experience.
The Bank's base-case projection for economic growth in Canada is 3.2 per cent in 2006, 2.9 per cent in 2007, and 2.8 per cent in 2008.
While this overall outlook for growth is largely unchanged from that in the April Report, it is a little stronger in 2006 and a little lower in 2007 and 2008.
The slower growth stems from the assumption that the Canada-US exchange rate will stay in its recent higher range over the projection period.
In addition, the projected composition of growth has changed somewhat since April.
Stronger growth in consumption spending is offset by a weaker outlook for net exports.
Strong domestic demand in Canada, supported by robust global growth, remains a key feature of the base-case projection.
Business investment and consumer spending are expected to remain strong, while spending on housing, after rising considerably in 2006, is expected to decline slightly in 2007 and 2008.
Government expenditures on goods, services, and transfers are assumed to increase broadly in line with revenues over the projection period, adding to the strength of domestic demand.
While exports are expected to continue to increase, reflecting the strength in global demand, export growth is now projected to make a more modest contribution to growth owing to the assumption that the exchange rate remains in its current range.
At the same time, further marked gains in investment in machinery and equipment, combined with the strength in the Canadian dollar, should stimulate imports.
Thus, net exports are expected to exert a drag on overall growth for some time, though this effect should diminish over the projection period.
The assumption for potential output growth continues to be 2.9 per cent in 2006 and 3.0 per cent in 2007 and 2008.
This growth profile implies that the economy would remain in slight excess demand over the remainder of 2006, before returning to its production capacity by the end of 2008.
In this base-case projection, the anticipated moderation of US growth, combined with the lagged effects of past interest rate and exchange rate increases, brings aggregate supply and demand back into balance.
Hence, in this projection, the current level of the policy interest rate is consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target.
Movements in the 12-month rate of increase in total CPI inflation will be importantly influenced by the cut in the GST from 7 per cent to 6 per cent on 1 July 2006 and by developments in the markets for crude oil and natural gas.
The direct effect of the one-percentage-point cut in the GST on the total CPI is estimated to be 0.6 per cent.
Total CPI inflation is expected to average just over 1.5 per cent in the second half of 2006 and the first half of 2007, before returning to the 2 per cent target.
Note that total CPI inflation is likely to fall temporarily to close to 1 per cent this September, reflecting the brief surge in energy prices last September.
Core inflation is expected to remain at about 2 per cent throughout the projection period.
The upward pressure on inflation from excess demand in the economy should be offset by continued downward pressure from further reductions in the prices of manufactured goods.
These two offsetting factors are projected to diminish in tandem over the projection period, with the result that the core rate should stay at 2 per cent.
The Canadian economy continues to operate just above its full production capacity, and the near-term outlook for core inflation has moved slightly higher.
However, with the US economy slowing more quickly than expected, the base-case projection for Canadian economic growth has been revised down slightly from that in the July Monetary Policy Report Update.
Lower energy prices have led to a downward revision of the projection for total consumer price inflation.
They have also contributed to moving the Canadian dollar into a somewhat lower trading range.
Although domestic demand in Canada has continued to grow at a robust pace, GDP growth in the second and third quarters of 2006 has been slower than expected, largely because of weaker net exports.
As well, the Bank has lowered its assumption for potential growth to 2.8 per cent for the 2006-08 period, given recent developments in labour productivity.
As a result of these factors, the Bank's base-case projection for Canadian GDP growth has been lowered to 2.8 per cent this year and 2.5 per cent in 2007.
But with the US economy projected to recover by the end of 2007, growth should pick up to 2.8 per cent in 2008.
Such a profile implies that the small amount of excess demand now in the economy will be eliminated by the second half of 2007 and that the economy will then remain roughly in balance through to the end of the projection period.
With the economy currently in slight excess demand and with strong momentum in housing prices, core inflation is expected to move slightly above 2 per cent in the coming months.
As the economy returns to potential and pressures from housing prices ease, core inflation should return to 2 per cent by the middle of 2007 and stay there through to the end of 2008.
Total CPI inflation will continue to be affected by the cut in the Goods and Services Tax and by developments in energy markets.
Based on prices embedded in markets for energy futures, total inflation will likely average about 1 1/2 per cent through to the second quarter of 2007, before returning to the 2 per cent target and remaining there through to the end of the projection period.
As noted in the press release of 6 September, the risks around the base-case projection are judged to be a little greater than at the time of the July Update.
The main upside risk relates to the momentum in household spending and housing prices.
The main downside risk is that the US economy could slow more sharply than expected, leading to lower Canadian exports.
The Bank judges that the upside and downside risks to its inflation projection are roughly balanced.
The correction of global imbalances is unfolding in a benign, albeit slow, manner.
However, in the absence of further appropriate policy actions, there remains a possibility of a disorderly resolution of these imbalances.
Consequently, the balance of risks for global and Canadian growth is tilted slightly to the downside late in the projection period.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI fell to 2.1 per cent in August from 2.8 per cent in May.
This drop largely reflected the impact on consumer prices of the GST reduction in July 2006, as well as lower year-to-year increases in energy prices at the consumer level.
If the effect of changes in indirect taxes is excluded, the rate of increase in the total CPI was 2.6 per cent in August.
The core rate of inflation, which also removes the effects of changes in indirect taxes, moved up to 2.0 per cent in July and August, after remaining at about 1.7 per cent over the first four months of this year.
While the rate of increase for the total CPI moved down close to the 2 per cent inflation target in August, it was somewhat higher than projected in the July Update.
There was an upward surprise in the price of gasoline.
As well, prices in the housing and service sectors increased at a slightly higher rate than expected.
For instance, homeowners' replacement costs (an important component of core prices for shelter) have risen at a faster pace this year as a result of considerably higher prices for new housing, particularly in Alberta.
Prices for other services have also increased at a slightly faster rate, mainly because of a modest rebound in automobile insurance premiums.
Partially offsetting these upward pressures has been the decrease in the prices of many import-intensive goods, which reflects the effects of further declines in the world prices of many manufactured goods and the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
The core rate of inflation moved up to 2.0 per cent in July - earlier than expected - and remained there in August.
Other measures of the trend rate of inflation that the Bank monitors have also tended to edge up close to 2 per cent, if the effects of changes in indirect taxes are excluded.
These increases in trend inflation measures are consistent with the Bank's view that the economy has recently been operating just above its production capacity.
Canadian real GDP, after growing at an annual rate of 3.6 per cent in the first quarter of 2006, rose by only 2.0 per cent in the second quarter, less than the 3.2 per cent projected in the July Update.
Currently available information suggests that real GDP grew by about 2 per cent in the third quarter of 2006.
Final domestic demand continued to be the major contributor to GDP growth in the first half of 2006, while net exports decreased over the period.
Strong overall profitability and capacity pressures in a number of industries, combined with ongoing reductions in the prices of imported machinery and equipment and favourable financing conditions, supported marked increases in capital spending by businesses.
With further substantial increases in real personal disposable income and household net worth (partly reflecting a considerable rise in housing prices), the growth of household expenditures was also quite robust over this period, picking up from the pace seen in the second half of 2005.
Despite ongoing strength in the global economy, there was a broad-based decline in Canada's exports in the first half of 2006, which appears to be related to several factors.
Exports of automotive products returned to more normal levels after being unusually high towards the end of 2005.
There are, however, indications that export growth revived in the third quarter of 2006, suggesting that some of the weakness in the first half of the year reflected transitory factors.
With ongoing firm growth in final domestic demand, imports continued to rise markedly in the first half of 2006, although at a slower pace than was observed in the second half of last year.
Although there has been some moderation of growth in recent months, most indicators of capacity pressures suggest that the economy was operating slightly above its production capacity in the third quarter of 2006.
With observed weakness in labour productivity growth, the Bank's conventional measure of potential output for the period since the beginning of 2005 was revised down slightly from the estimate used in the last Update.
These developments are reflected in the Bank's conventional measure of the output gap, which indicates that the economy was operating about 0.2 per cent above its production capacity in the third quarter of 2006.
This estimate is subject to a considerable degree of uncertainty, but the broad picture of an economy in slight excess demand is consistent with a range of other capacity indicators.
In the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey, the percentage of firms reporting difficulties in meeting an unanticipated increase in demand remained above average.
Statistics Canada's measure of capacity utilization in the non-farm, goods-producing sector also indicated above-average pressure on production capacity in the second quarter of 2006.
The employment-to-population ratio in September remains very high by historical standards, while the unemployment rate has stayed low.
The underlying trend increase in wages seems to have risen further in recent months and now appears to be more consistent with the indicators of tightness in labour markets than was previously the case.
Core inflation has been close to 2 per cent since May, despite ongoing downward pressure on the prices of globally traded durable and semi-durable goods.
This appears to be consistent with an economy that has been operating slightly above its production capacity.
Within these national measures, it is evident that capacity pressures continue to be strongest in the western provinces.
There has been a marked pickup in housing price increases in Alberta and Vancouver and, at the same time, some moderation in price gains for housing in certain urban centres in Central and Atlantic Canada.
Wage increases in Alberta also continue to be markedly higher than those in other parts of the country, reflecting the differing pressures in labour markets.
The Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey confirms that capacity pressures remain much more intense in the western provinces than elsewhere, with little change from the preceding survey.
After a review of all the indicators of capacity pressures, it is the judgment of the Governing Council that overall, the economy was operating just above its production capacity in the third quarter of 2006.
The trend growth in wages has continued to move higher in recent months and, as already noted, is now more consistent with other indicators of the degree of tightness in labour markets.
This assessment is based on the 12-month change in average hourly earnings of permanent workers reported by Statistics Canada in the Labour Force Survey, which is considered to be a good indicator of the underlying change in wages.
This measure suggests that the rate of increase in aggregate wages has risen to between 3.5 and 4 per cent.
The year-to-year increase in another indicator of compensation - hourly labour compensation from Statistics Canada's Productivity Accounts - which earlier on had been boosted by unusually large one-time payments, was also about 4 per cent in the second quarter of 2006.
Over the past three and a half years, productivity growth in the business sector has averaged 1.0 per cent.
After little change in 2003 and 2004, productivity picked up considerably in 2005, growing by 2.4 per cent.
However, productivity growth appears to have slowed once again in the first half of 2006.
In the absence of a sustained period with productivity growth above 2 per cent to offset the virtual absence of productivity growth in 2003 and 2004, the balance of risks around the Bank's previous assumption for trend productivity growth of about 1 3/4 per cent has shifted to the downside.
While assessments of trend productivity growth are difficult, the modest realized pace of productivity growth is consistent with an economy that is undergoing significant structural adjustment in the face of large movements in commodity prices, the marked appreciation of the Canadian dollar, and new sources of competition from emerging Asia.
As discussed in previous Monetary Policy Reports, this adjustment involves a reallocation of labour and capital towards the production of commodities with significantly higher prices, and towards the non-tradable goods and services sectors.
During the adjustment period, capital and labour are likely to be less productive.
Observed trends in productivity growth suggest that this adjustment is ongoing and may be having a larger and more protracted impact on productivity growth than previously projected.
With this in mind, something closer to 1.5 per cent would appear to be a more balanced assumption for trend productivity growth over the next couple of years.
With the assumption regarding trend labour input growth remaining at about 1.25 per cent, this implies potential growth of about 2.8 per cent.
When the modest observed productivity gains are taken into account, unit labour costs in the second quarter of 2006 were up 2.6 per cent from their level a year earlier.
With recent compensation increases at between 3.5 and 4 per cent and with trend productivity growth now assumed to be about 1.5 per cent, underlying increases in unit labour costs have risen but still appear to be in the range of 2 per cent.
The prices of non-energy commodities have remained firm since the July Update.
Metals prices have risen a little further, reflecting strengthening global demand and further production disruptions.
Lumber prices, in contrast, have eased as a result of the downturn in the US housing market.
The price of light crude oil (West Texas Intermediate), which was US$74 per barrel at the time of the July Update, averaged US$59 in the ten days ending on 13 October 2006.
This decrease appears to reflect market expectations of a reduced supply risk and some easing in the prospects for global oil demand (resulting from the effect of persistently high oil prices).
In recent weeks, natural gas prices were also somewhat lower than in early July, reflecting relatively high inventories following lower-than-expected demand for cooling in the late summer.
With the marked reduction in natural gas prices since the end of 2005, Canada's terms of trade fell back in the first half of 2006.
As a result, the four-quarter change in the chain price index for GDP (a broad price measure of the goods and services produced in Canada) decreased from 4.1 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2005 to 2.8 per cent in the second quarter of 2006.
Consequently, the year-to-year increase in nominal GDP moderated during this period, although still rising by some 5.7 per cent in the year ending in the second quarter of 2006.
The resulting above-average increase in real income (defined as the difference between the year-to-year rise of nominal GNP and that of the deflator for final domestic demand) was still providing support for the considerable gain in final domestic demand.
The recent decline in the prices of crude oil and natural gas will likely lead to a further reduction in Canada's terms of trade over the remainder of 2006 and, therefore, to slower growth in nominal GDP.
In turn, this reduced rate of nominal income growth can be expected to put some downward pressure on the growth of corporate profits and government revenues.
Since the July Update, policy interest rates have continued to move higher in a number of industrialized countries outside North America.
The European Central Bank, the Bank of England, and the Reserve Bank of Australia have all raised their respective policy rates, and financial markets expect further policy tightening in 2006 and early 2007.
The Bank of Japan has also raised its policy rate, effectively ending its "zero interest rate policy," now that the Japanese economy appears to be on a sustainable growth path.
In contrast, policy rates in both Canada and the United States have recently been left unchanged, following a number of consecutive increases.
Short-term interest rates embody expectations that policy rates in these two countries will remain at their current levels for the rest of 2006 but decline somewhat in 2007.
Despite some heightened inflationary concerns among market participants at the time of the last Update, inflation expectations in major industrialized countries have since moderated, partly reflecting the recent decline in energy prices and the weaker growth outlook for the US economy.
Such developments have contributed to the decrease in the yields on the long-term government bonds of major industrialized countries since mid-year.
Currency markets have been relatively steady since the July Update, with many currency pairs trading in relatively narrow ranges.
Over this period, the Canadian dollar has generally been within a range of 87.5 to 90.5 cents US, compared with the range of 88.5 to 91.5 cents US for May to mid-July assumed in the projection in the Update.
It would appear that the impact on the Canadian dollar from the decline in energy prices since July has been partly offset by an increase in currency flows related to cross-border mergers and acquisitions in Canada.
Since the end of 2005, the Canadian dollar has also traded within a fairly steady range against the currencies of its other major trading partners.
Access to credit for the non-financial business sector has remained very favourable, at a cost comparable to, or in the case of debt financing, more favourable than that at the time of the April Report.
Although strong cash flow has moderated firms' borrowing requirements, business credit has continued to grow at a rate above its historical average because of a marked increase in capital expenditures.
Favourable credit conditions have been supported by above-average profit margins and the generally sound balance sheets of the non-financial business sector.
There is, however, growing disparity in the profitability of various sectors, with resource-producing and domestically oriented sectors outperforming non-resource-based sectors exposed to trade.
Financial institutions continue to be in a good position to lend, as a result of their strong profitability, healthy balance sheets, and the low level of impaired loans.
With Canada's economic outlook boding well for the business sector's profitability, firms should continue to have ready access to the funding needed for robust investment.
Financial conditions also continue to provide strong support to household spending.
Increases in house prices and household credit continue to be well above historical averages.
This is allowing households to finance consumption with loans secured by home equity.
This phenomenon is more pronounced in Western Canada, where house prices have risen dramatically over the past two years.
Despite this strong credit growth, the debt-service burden of households continues to be modest, since rates on mortgages and consumer loans remain historically low.
These conditions continue to point to a strong underpinning for continued growth in household spending.
Since the last Report, growth in narrow money (M1+) has remained stable, driven by sustained strength in non-personal deposits resulting from firms' accumulation of cash balances.
Narrow money growth suggests that near-term output growth will be slightly below the growth of production capacity.
This section outlines the Bank's outlook for the global economy through to the end of 2008, followed by the associated projection for the Canadian economy.
This base-case projection has been developed assuming a slow and orderly resolution of global imbalances resulting from supportive policy actions to rebalance global demand and a gradual real effective depreciation of the US dollar.
Energy prices are assumed to evolve along a path that is consistent with current futures prices, and the Canadian dollar is assumed to remain within the recent range of 87.5 to 90.5 cents US.
The robust global expansion, under way for the past four years, is expected to moderate only slightly over the next two years.
Overall, real global GDP is projected to grow solidly: by 5.1 per cent in 2006, 4.7 per cent in 2007, and 4.5 per cent in 2008.
Economic growth in emerging markets has been particularly strong, with many countries benefiting from earlier increases in export earnings stemming from high commodity prices and from the continued expansion of domestic demand.
The growth of the US economy, which has been an important source of global demand in recent years, has moderated.
The gradual slowing in overall global growth through the projection period reflects growing capacity constraints and the associated tightening in monetary policy by the major industrial economies.
Growth in Asia (excluding Japan) continues at a robust pace, with China's vigorous economy still boosting regional growth rates.
The outlook for real GDP growth in China and emerging Asia remains buoyant, with only a moderate slowing over the next two years.
In Japan, solid growth in investment, and to a lesser extent, in consumer expenditures, is expected to underpin economic activity over the next few years through what is likely to be an extended period of fiscal consolidation.
In the euro zone, output continues to grow, although the pace of expansion will be limited by the modest growth in productive capacity.
In the United States, real GDP is expected to grow 3.3 per cent in 2006, slightly lower than projected in the July Update.
In recent months, there has been a pronounced slowdown in the housing sector, as well as weakness in the motor vehicle sector.
The base-case scenario projects that US real GDP growth will remain below potential output growth into 2007 before moving above potential through 2008.
This implies that a small degree of excess supply would build in the United States before being gradually absorbed in 2008.
With excess supply opening up in the US economy, core inflation should move gradually lower.
At the same time, the low cost of corporate financing and strong growth in corporate profits are expected to continue to support investment.
The projected strengthening of GDP growth in 2008 stems largely from two factors.
First, the housing and auto sectors are expected to stop subtracting from growth.
Second, with a further assumed real effective depreciation of the US dollar of about 7 per cent over the projection horizon, and a strengthening in global investment which raises demand for US capital goods, the growth in US exports is projected to accelerate.
This strengthening in export growth would contribute to a gradual improvement in the US current account deficit.
More broadly, with domestic demand expected to grow more slowly in the United States but more quickly in the rest of the world, demand is expected to be better balanced around the globe.
In the base-case scenario, this rotation of demand is supported by the assumed depreciation of the US-dollar real effective exchange rate, which is expected to occur mainly against the currencies of emerging Asia, Japan, and some of the oil-exporting countries that did not experience a significant appreciation in the 2002-04 period.
These developments are consistent with an orderly resolution of global imbalances.
Futures prices for crude oil and natural gas over the projection period are lower than those in the July Update.
In the case of crude oil, this implies that prices would move up from their current level of just under US$60 per barrel to US$65 per barrel by the middle of 2007 and rise gradually to US$67 in 2008.
The price index for non-energy commodities is expected to decline over the projection period from the high levels reached in the third quarter of 2006.
This partly reflects anticipated reductions in metals prices as increases in global capacity come on stream.
Even so, with global demand for commodities projected to remain relatively strong, in line with robust global growth, the overall level of non-energy commodity prices is projected to stay high in relation to historical norms.
In Canada, growth in final domestic demand is expected to continue to contribute importantly to economic expansion in the second half of 2006 and through 2007 and 2008.
Consumer spending is expected to grow at a robust pace over the projection period as a result of further gains in real disposable income and increases in household net worth.
Housing investment, after another substantial gain in 2006, is projected to decline slightly in 2007 and 2008.
Business investment is projected to grow strongly.
Factors supporting a strong expansion include current capacity constraints, expectations of ongoing growth in the global economy, indications that energy and metals prices will stay relatively high for some time, continued favourable financial conditions, strong profit levels overall and very solid balance sheets, and further reductions in the prices of imported machinery and equipment.
The base-case projection assumes that the government sector will run a balanced budget over the projection period.
Consistent with slowing nominal GDP growth, growth in government revenues is expected to slow.
The large surpluses that have been evident recently would imply that projected growth in spending by all levels of government will be above projected revenue growth for a period of time.
With the expected slowing in the growth of US domestic demand into 2007 and the lagged effects from the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar, export growth is projected to be weak over the projection period.
At the same time, continued substantial increases in investment in machinery and equipment, combined with the further impact of the past rise of the Canadian dollar, should help to boost imports.
As a result, net exports should exert a significant drag on overall growth in 2006 and 2007, although this effect should ease over the projection period.
The Bank's base-case outlook calls for economic growth, on an average annual basis, to be 2.8 per cent in 2006, 2.5 per cent in 2007, and 2.8 per cent in 2008.
The outlook for both 2006 and 2007 is lower than that in the July Update.
This lower growth mainly reflects two factors.
First, the weaker US economic outlook means that the projection for net exports and, to a lesser extent, investment has been revised down.
Second, since the recent trend in labour productivity has been lower than expected, the assumption for growth in production capacity from 2006 to 2008 has been revised down to 2.8 per cent.
This profile for GDP growth implies that the economy would stay in slight excess demand over the near term, before moving back to its production capacity in the second half of 2007.
The economy would then continue to operate at about full capacity through to the end of 2008.
In this base-case projection, it is the near-term slowing and the subsequent pickup in the US economy, combined with the lagged effects of past interest rate and exchange rate movements, that bring aggregate supply and demand back into balance and keep them there.
Hence, in this projection, the current level of the policy rate is consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target.
Most indicators of inflation expectations that the Bank follows have remained quite stable since the time of the April Report, and key medium - and longer-term measures continue to be close to 2 per cent.
In the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey, 78 per cent of firms expected CPI inflation to be within a range of 1 to 3 per cent, on average, over the next two years.
Furthermore, the average private sector forecast for total CPI inflation in 2007 was just under 2 per cent, and consensus forecasts of inflation over the longer term remained very close to 2 per cent.
Broad money (M2++) growth has risen to around 7 per cent, a rate which, if maintained, would be consistent with core inflation at about 2 per cent over the next year.
The outlook for the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI is importantly affected by the cut in the GST from 7 per cent to 6 per cent that took effect on 1 July 2006, and by developments in the markets for crude oil, gasoline, and natural gas.
Available indicators suggest that total CPI inflation fell below 1 per cent in September 2006 as a result of the recent decline in crude oil and gasoline prices and the base-year effects stemming from the hurricane-related surge in energy prices in September of 2005.
The prices of both crude oil and natural gas are assumed to follow the path given by futures prices, which are below the levels in the July Update.
As a result, total CPI inflation is now expected to average close to 1.5 per cent from the fourth quarter of 2006 to the second quarter of 2007, a little lower than projected in the Update.
After the direct effect of the GST cut disappears in mid-2007, total CPI inflation is expected to average close to the 2 per cent target over the remainder of the projection period.
The core rate of inflation is expected to move slightly above 2 per cent through to mid-2007, given the small amount of excess demand currently in the economy and continued momentum in the price of housing.
These sources of upward pressure should continue to be partly offset by further downward pressure arising from ongoing decreases in the prices of manufactured goods, although these price decreases are expected to moderate over time.
As the economy returns to its production potential and housing pressures ease, core inflation is projected to move back to 2 per cent by the second half of 2007 and remain there.
Increases in labour compensation are expected to average about 4 per cent over the early part of the projection period before easing somewhat.
Given the assumed growth of trend labour productivity of 1.5 per cent, the expected year-to-year increase in unit labour costs is projected to be slightly above 2 per cent in the early part of the projection period, declining to 2 per cent by the end of the period.
The Bank's base-case projection continues to be subject to important upside and downside risks.
As noted in the press release of 6 September, these risks are judged to be somewhat greater than at the time of the July Update.
The main upside risk to the Canadian economy continues to relate to the momentum in household spending and housing prices.
This momentum is linked to strong consumer credit growth.
By increasing home equity and thus expanding the availability of collateral, the recent strong increases in house prices have contributed to robust growth in consumer credit.
There is a risk that these linkages could be stronger than assumed or that house prices could continue to grow more rapidly than expected, resulting in higher-than-projected household spending and, hence, greater upward pressures on inflation.
The main downside risk to the Canadian economy relates to the possibility of a sharper slowdown in the housing sector in the United States and a broadening of the weakness in the housing sector to consumption and investment.
This development would lead to lower inflation than in the base-case projection.
Related to these main risks, there are a number of other risks to the base-case projection, two of which are described below.
An upside risk relates to sectoral and regional capacity pressures arising from the price boom in several commodities, which are being most intensely felt in Western Canada (especially in Alberta).
These pressures have led to considerable upward momentum in labour costs in that region.
There is a risk that prices and wages could increase even more rapidly in Western Canada or that the transmission of inflationary pressures from there to the rest of the country could be stronger.
A downside risk relates to the effects of the projected slowing in US economic growth on the rest of the world, particularly in those emerging economies that are currently experiencing very strong growth.
To the extent that business investment in these countries is being undertaken to meet prospective consumer demand in the United States, domestic demand growth in these countries may not be sufficient to offset the projected weaker US demand.
A greater-than-expected slowing in the global economy would likely result in weaker commodity prices and a weaker profile for Canadian exports over the projection period, thus putting downward pressure on Canadian inflation.
The correction in global imbalances is unfolding in a benign, albeit slow, manner.
The global economy has continued to expand robustly.
However, US economic growth slowed in 2006, with the weakness concentrated in the automotive and housing sectors.
This weakness does not appear to have spread to the rest of the US economy and, with signs that a significant amount of the adjustment in these sectors has already taken place, US economic growth is expected to pick up.
With reduced demand for Canadian exports and the need to adjust inventories, output growth in Canada decelerated more than had been expected in the October Report, likely averaging about 1.6 per cent in the second half of last year.
The Bank judges that at the end of 2006, the Canadian economy was operating at, or just above, its production capacity.
Looking ahead, real GDP growth should average about 2 1/2 per cent in the first half of 2007, rising to about 2 3/4 per cent in the second half.
In 2008, growth is projected to stay in line with the growth of potential output (estimated at 2.8 per cent), keeping the economy operating near its capacity throughout the projection period.
With the weakness seen in the second half of 2006, this growth profile implies average annual growth of 2.3 per cent in 2007 and 2.8 per cent in 2008.
Total consumer price inflation will continue to be affected by movements in energy prices and, during the first half of 2007, by last year's reduction in the Goods and Services Tax.
If energy prices unfold in line with current futures prices, total CPI inflation should fall to about 1 per cent in the first half of 2007, returning to the 2 per cent target early in 2008.
With the economy operating near its production potential, and with slightly less upward pressure from housing prices, core inflation should return to 2 per cent in the first half of 2007 and stay there throughout the projection period.
The Bank judges that the risks to its inflation projection are roughly balanced.
The main downside risk continues to be that growth in the US economy could be lower than expected.
The main upside risk comes from rising house prices and increased spending related to borrowing against home equity.
Both these upside and downside risks have diminished somewhat since the October Report.
There remains a small possibility of a disorderly resolution of global imbalances, in the absence of further appropriate policy actions internationally.
There also continues to be considerable uncertainty about Canadian trend productivity growth.
Recent productivity data have been weak, and it is unclear how much of that weakness is due to cyclical factors.
The Bank of Canada left the target rate for the overnight rate unchanged at 4.25 per cent on 5 December 2006 and 16 January 2007.
In line with the Bank's outlook, the current level of the policy rate is judged, at this time, to be consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target over the medium term.
Since the October Report, the global economic expansion has remained robust.
Economic growth in the euro area over the past few months has been slightly stronger than projected, and growth in China continues to outperform expectations.
In Japan, business investment and exports remain vigorous despite relatively weak household consumption.
The stronger overseas demand, particularly in business investment, along with a modest real effective depreciation of the US dollar over the past year and a half, continues to support US exports and is consistent with the Bank's assumption of an orderly resolution of global imbalances.
With this continuing strength in global demand, commodity prices have remained high since the October Report.
Oil and natural gas prices have recently eased, however, owing to warmer-than-usual temperatures in North America.
After a strong start to 2006, real GDP growth in the United States moderated.
This mainly reflected a substantial downturn in residential investment and reduced motor vehicle production.
More broadly, the need to adjust inventory levels is also dampening manufacturing production, and business investment is somewhat less buoyant than previously expected.
But adjustments in the housing and auto sectors have not led to significant spillover effects in the rest of the US economy.
Household consumption has remained firm, supported by steady employment gains in the services sector.
With the slower growth in the US economy, output growth in Canada has also decelerated.
In the third quarter, real GDP grew at an annual rate of 1.7 per cent.
While this was slightly less than projected in our October Report, the level of real GDP in the third quarter was as anticipated because of an upward revision to growth in the first quarter.
Based on available information, real GDP is likely to have grown by about 1.5 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2006, weaker than the 2.8 per cent rate projected in the October Report.
This slowdown in growth in the second half of 2006 was largely due to reduced US demand for building materials and motor vehicles - which has adversely affected Canada's exports - and to the need for Canadian businesses to adjust inventories.
This inventory adjustment appears to have been related largely, but not entirely, to weaker US demand for Canadian goods.
Final domestic demand remains the key contributor to growth in Canada.
Strength in labour markets and real personal disposable income, together with increases in household net worth and household credit, has continued to support solid growth in consumer spending.
After reviewing all the indicators of capacity pressures, it is the Governing Council's judgment that the economy was operating at, or just above, its production capacity in the fourth quarter of 2006.
A number of indicators suggest that the economy was operating above its production capacity.
In the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey, the percentage of companies reporting that they would have difficulties in meeting an unanticipated increase in demand was still above average.
The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap suggests that the economy was operating just above its production potential in the fourth quarter.
The employment-to-population ratio remained very high in December compared with historical experience, and the unemployment rate was at a 30-year low.
The core rate of inflation has been slightly above 2 per cent in recent months.
On the other hand, the underlying trend increase in wages (based on average hourly earnings of permanent workers) has eased to a range of 2.5 to 3.5 per cent in recent months, after moving up earlier in 2006.
As well, the percentage of firms reporting labour shortages in the Bank's winter survey was slightly below average.
In recent months, total CPI inflation has been slightly lower than projected in the October Report.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI fell to just below 1 per cent in September and October 2006.
This mainly reflected anticipated base-year effects associated with the hurricane-related surge in energy prices in September of 2005, and unanticipated declines in the prices of gasoline and natural gas.
Total CPI inflation moved up to 1.4 per cent in November as the base-year effects dissipated.
From September to November of 2006, the core rate of inflation averaged about 2.2 per cent, up from 2 per cent in July and August.
This increase was largely because core prices for shelter and other services rose at a slightly faster rate, although more recently there are some indications of a moderation in the rate of increase in housing prices.
Decreases in the prices of many import-intensive goods continued to put downward pressure on core inflation.
The four-quarter change in the chain price index for GDP eased from 3.0 per cent in the second quarter of 2006 to 1.4 per cent in the third quarter, reflecting a further reduction in Canada's terms of trade.
This caused further moderation in the year-to-year increase in nominal GDP.
Long-term interest rates, market volatility, and credit spreads have remained low in most countries.
In addition, many equity indexes have recently recorded either multi-year or all-time highs.
Against this backdrop, financing conditions in Canada remain favourable.
Financial institutions and markets continue to be willing to lend, since business profitability and overall financial health remain strong.
Growth of business credit is near its historical average, and the modest decline experienced since early 2006 likely reflects a slight moderation in demand rather than a tightening in the supply of credit.
The pace of growth in household credit remains well above its historical average, although it has declined somewhat since the last Report.
This strong growth has been partly associated with borrowing against home equity.
Growth rates of the narrow and broad monetary aggregates have continued to increase.
Over the past three months, the Canadian dollar has moved from a high of 89.5 cents US to a low of close to 84.5 cents US.
This reflects a number of factors, including the recent weakness in energy prices and an unwinding of support from cross-border currency flows related to mergers and acquisitions.
The Bank's base-case projection incorporates the following key assumptions: energy prices evolving in line with current futures prices, a gradual real effective depreciation of the US dollar, and a Canada/US exchange rate in the range of 84.5 to 87.5 cents US, evident since the December interest rate announcement.
The robust expansion of the global economy is still expected to decelerate to a more sustainable rate over 2007-08.
As in the October Report, global economic growth is projected to ease from 5.1 per cent in 2006 to 4.7 per cent in 2007, and to 4.5 per cent in 2008.
In the base-case scenario for the US economy, real GDP growth is expected to recover to the rate of growth in potential output in the second half of 2007 before moving slightly above potential growth through 2008.
On an annual basis, growth is projected to be 2.5 per cent in 2007 and 3.2 per cent in 2008 (very close to the projection in the October Report).
Futures prices for crude oil and natural gas are lower than those in the October Report, with prices for crude oil moving up from current levels of about US$53 per barrel to about US$59 on average in 2007 and about US$63 in 2008.
The price index for non-energy commodities is still expected to decrease modestly over the projection period from the very high levels reached towards the end of 2006.
In the Bank's base-case projection for Canada, economic growth picks up through 2007, with quarterly growth averaging about 2.5 per cent at annual rates in the first half of the year and about 2.75 per cent in the second half.
Together with the weaker growth experienced in the second half of 2006, this implies annual average growth for 2007 of 2.3 per cent.
For 2008, growth is projected to continue at a pace of 2.8 per cent, in line with the growth of potential output.
This implies that the economy would continue to operate near its production capacity throughout the entire projection period.
Strong domestic demand in Canada continues to be a key feature of the base-case projection.
However, Canadian export growth is expected to remain weak in the near term, recovering gradually through 2007 and 2008.
At the same time, pronounced gains in investment in machinery and equipment should boost imports further.
Consequently, net exports should continue to exert a considerable drag on overall growth in 2007, with this effect diminishing over the projection period.
The inventory adjustment evident in the second half of 2006 is expected to be largely completed early in 2007 and, therefore, would no longer subtract from growth.
The projection for core inflation is little changed from that in the October Report.
With the economy expected to remain close to its production potential and with easing housing price pressures, core inflation is expected to return to 2 per cent in the first half of 2007 and remain there throughout the projection period.
In 2007, movements in the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI will be importantly influenced by the GST cut in July 2006 and by developments in the markets for crude oil, gasoline, and natural gas.
Total CPI inflation is expected to average just above 1 per cent in the first half of 2007, before returning to the 2 per cent target by early 2008.
The current level of the policy rate is consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target in this base-case projection.
Growth in the Canadian economy has been essentially in line with the expectations set out in the Bank's January Monetary Policy Report Update.
But inflation has been higher than expected because pressures on capacity over the past year have been stronger than previously judged, and the prices of food and gasoline have recently risen more than expected.
After considering the full range of indicators, the Bank now judges that the Canadian economy was operating just above its production capacity in the first quarter of this year.
Robust domestic demand continues to support Canada's economic growth, and there has also been stronger-than-expected growth outside North America, which has led to rising demand for, and prices of, many commodities.
Over the projection horizon, domestic demand should remain robust, although not as strong as in recent years.
With the US slowdown now expected to be somewhat more prolonged than previously projected, net exports should exert a slightly greater drag on growth in 2007.
All told, the Canadian economy is expected to expand at a rate slower than potential through 2007, and in line with potential through 2008 and 2009.
With the excess demand in the economy expected to disappear in the second half of this year, and with pressures on housing prices expected to continue to ease, core inflation is projected to decline to 2 per cent by the end of 2007 and remain there through the projection period.
If energy prices evolve in line with those currently reflected in futures markets, total inflation should average just below 2 per cent in the second quarter of 2007 before moving above the 2 per cent target and peaking below 3 per cent near the end of 2007.
The upside risk to the Bank's inflation projection is that the recent strength of inflation could be more persistent than projected.
Pressures on capacity could be greater and more prolonged than currently judged.
The strong growth in household credit and broad money continues to point to this upside risk.
As well, the downward pressure on inflation from the prices of imported goods could diminish more quickly than expected, and global food and energy prices could put more upward pressure on inflation.
The downside risk to inflation continues to come from the possibility of a slowdown in the US economy that is more pronounced than that already incorporated in the Bank's base-case projection.
The Bank continues to judge that the risks to its inflation projection are roughly balanced, although there is now a slight tilt to the upside.
The current level of the target for the overnight rate is judged, at this time, to be consistent with achieving the inflation target over the medium term.
The year-over-year rate of increase in the total CPI has been higher than projected in the January Update, having risen from 1.3 per cent in the last quarter of 2006 to 1.9 per cent in the first quarter of 2007.
If the effect of changes in indirect taxes is excluded, the rate of increase in the total CPI in the first quarter of 2007 was 2.4 per cent.
The core rate of inflation increased to 2.3 per cent over the same period, also slightly higher than expected.
The core rate of inflation has been moving up since the spring of 2006.
Capacity pressures stemming from strong domestic demand have contributed to an increase in inflationary pressures, especially on the prices of components such as shelter services and, to a lesser extent, of services other than shelter.
As well, the downward pressure on the core rate coming from reduced prices for many import-intensive goods (such as clothing and durable goods other than automobiles) has lessened somewhat.
In the first quarter of 2007, the year-over-year rate of increase in housing prices eased slightly more than anticipated at the time of the January Update.
However, this was more than offset by higher-than-expected increases in the prices of several other components of the core rate of inflation.
In particular, the recent surge in the prices of grains and oilseeds, stemming partly from the persistent rise in the demand for biofuels, has contributed to higher core food prices.
Prices of imported clothing, durable goods excluding autos, and of core services other than housing have also come in higher than anticipated.
The higher-than-expected increase in total CPI inflation in the first quarter of 2007 reflected both the higher-than-projected core rate and increases in the prices of some of the more volatile components.
Fruit and vegetable prices rose unexpectedly as a result of weather-related reductions in North American supplies.
Gasoline prices were higher than projected, partly owing to temporary production disruptions at oil refineries, although the impact of higher prices for crude oil also played a role.
Other measures of the trend rate of inflation that the Bank follows have also moved up above 2 per cent when the effect of changes in indirect taxes is excluded.
In the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey, 88 per cent of firms expected CPI inflation to be within a range of 1 to 3 per cent, on average, over the next two years.
Consistent with the temporary reduction in CPI inflation stemming from the cut in the GST, the average private sector forecast for total CPI inflation in 2007 was slightly below 2 per cent, while consensus forecasts of inflation over the longer term continued to be very close to 2 per cent.
Real GDP growth in Canada slowed modestly in the second half of 2006, increasing by 2.0 per cent in the third quarter and by 1.4 per cent in the fourth quarter.
The outcome for the fourth quarter was very close to the 1.5 per cent projected in the January Update, with a decrease in inventory investment exerting a significant drag on growth.
The inventory correction appears to have been largely completed by the end of 2006.
Currently available information suggests that real GDP grew by about 2.5 per cent in the first quarter of 2007, close to the 2.4 per cent rate projected in the last Update.
Although the growth of final domestic demand has slowed since the middle of 2006 from the very strong pace registered in the first half, it remained the chief driver of GDP growth.
Further substantial increases in capital spending by businesses reflected relatively high overall profitability, earlier reductions in the prices of imported machinery and equipment, and continued favourable financing conditions.
With solid employment growth, real personal disposable income continued to rise, as did household net worth and household credit, contributing to ongoing strength in consumer spending.
The US economic slowdown has continued to affect Canada's economic growth.
In particular, the weak level of motor vehicle sales in the United States contributed to significant production cuts in the Canadian auto industry.
Consequently, inventory investment in motor-vehicle-related industries in Canada decreased sharply, especially in the fourth quarter of the year.
As well, further large declines in residential investment in the United States resulted in reductions in Canadian exports of lumber and, to a lesser extent, other building materials.
Nevertheless, Canada's total exports recovered in the second half of 2006.
Exports of machinery and equipment, metals and minerals, and agricultural and fish products all rose strongly after mid-2006.
At the same time, after another strong gain in the third quarter of 2006, imports eased towards year-end and into this year, partly as a result of the reduced inventory investment by Canadian businesses.
In recent years, most of the growth in output has come from increases in labour input (as indicated by hours worked), rather than from gains in labour productivity.
For the 2004-06 period, annual growth in hours worked in the business sector averaged about 1.8 per cent, which was well above expectations.
Most of this growth came from the expansion of the working-age population.
In the fourth quarter of 2006, hours worked continued to increase solidly, with year-over-year growth of 1.8 per cent.
Annual growth in labour productivity in the business sector averaged about 1.2 per cent for the 2004-06 period, down from 2.3 per cent over the 1996-2000 period.
One factor contributing to the slowdown in productivity growth could be the large amount of structural adjustment under way in the Canadian economy in the face of rising global competition and stronger demand for commodities, which has pushed up commodity prices and the trade-weighted value of the Canadian dollar.
In particular, labour and capital have been moving towards commodity production and the non-tradable goods and services sectors.
It is reasonable to expect that labour and capital could be somewhat less productive during the transition period.
Also, higher commodity prices encourage the production of resources that are more difficult and costly to extract, dampening productivity in those sectors.
Productivity growth was particularly slow in the second half of 2006, with measured productivity in the fourth quarter up only 0.4 per cent from a year earlier.
In addition to the factors noted above, some of this weakness would also appear to be cyclical in nature, reflecting the inventory correction and more general weakness in the manufacturing sector.
As well, productivity in the services sector continues to be below expectations.
All told, especially given the recent strength in investment, the extent of the weakness in overall productivity remains somewhat puzzling.
The Bank estimates potential output over history by breaking out movements in labour supply and labour productivity into their trend and cyclical components.
Using its conventional measure, the Bank currently estimates that average growth in potential output over the 2004-06 period was 2.6 per cent.
This is somewhat lower than the 2.8 per cent to 3 per cent that had been assumed in projections of potential output growth over that period.
This slower pace of growth in potential output over the past several years largely reflects the weakness in the growth of actual labour productivity, which has more than offset higher-than-expected growth in labour input.
Several indicators of capacity pressures continue to suggest that the economy has been operating in slight excess demand.
In the spring Business Outlook Survey from the Bank's regional offices, the percentage of firms reporting that they would have difficulty in meeting an unanticipated increase in demand remained above average.
The employment-to-population ratio in March 2007 was at its highest level in 31 years, and the unemployment rate in both February and March was at a 31-year low.
The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap, which is subject to a substantial degree of uncertainty, indicates that the economy was operating about 0.2 per cent above its production potential in the first quarter of 2007, slightly higher than was expected in the January Update.
The fact that the core rate of inflation has averaged slightly above 2 per cent since September 2006 is also consistent with an economy operating slightly above its production capacity.
In contrast, other indicators suggest that the economy may be either in balance or even in slight excess supply.
The percentage of firms reporting labour shortages in the Bank's spring survey, while up slightly from the previous survey, was still only about average on a historical basis.
Statistics Canada's measure of capacity utilization in the non-farm, goods-producing sector suggested below-average pressure on production capacity by the fourth quarter of 2006.
The underlying trend increase in aggregate wages (based on the 12-month change in average hourly earnings of permanent workers reported by Statistics Canada in the Labour Force Survey) has fallen to between 2.25 per cent and 3 per cent since the third quarter of 2006.
The year-to-year rise in another wage indicator - hourly labour compensation from Statistics Canada's Productivity Accounts - decreased to just over 3 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2006.
Given the very low gains in productivity, unit labour costs in the fourth quarter of 2006 were up 2.7 per cent from their level a year earlier.
With recent compensation increases ranging between 2.25 per cent and 3 per cent and with trend productivity growth estimated at about 1 per cent in 2006, underlying increases in unit labour costs seem to have been lower, at just under 2 per cent.
After reviewing all the indicators of capacity pressures, it is the Governing Council's judgment that, overall, the economy was operating just above its production capacity in the first quarter of 2007.
Consequently, the four-quarter change in the chain price index for GDP (a broad price measure of the goods and services produced in Canada) eased from 3.0 per cent in the second quarter of 2006 to 0.5 per cent in the fourth quarter.
This contributed to further moderation in the annual increase in nominal GDP, which rose by only 2.8 per cent in the year ending in the fourth quarter of 2006.
Growth in global demand for commodities continues to be underpinned by the strong global economy, particularly in the emerging-market economies led by China and India.
Combined with delays in several major projects intended to expand supplies, this has led to further increases in the world prices of many non-energy commodities since the January Update.
The price of light crude oil (West Texas Intermediate), which was about US$53 per barrel at the time of the January Update, averaged US$63 in the ten days ending on 20 April 2007.
This increase was chiefly caused by strengthening North American demand with the return of normal winter weather conditions, as well as by somewhat greater geopolitical uncertainties.
This recent improvement in most commodity prices should lead to a recovery in Canada's terms of trade in early 2007 and, thus, to somewhat stronger growth in nominal GDP.
This strengthened rate of nominal income growth should, in turn, help to increase the growth of corporate profits and government tax revenues in the near term.
The global economy continues to be characterized by high levels of desired savings relative to desired investment.
This has contributed to a financial environment that exhibits low levels of long-term interest rates and strong investor appetite for risk, reflected in the low level of risky spreads.
Moreover, equity markets and debt issuance around the world have been buoyant.
In February and March, volatility and risk premiums rose in many markets from historically low levels, but have since largely returned to those low levels.
The main exception is the US sub-prime mortgage market, where some difficulties persist and further deterioration is possible.
Short-term interest rates in the United States reflect expectations of a modest decline in the federal funds rate in the second half of 2007.
Responding to the sustained strength of their economies, several central banks, including the Bank of England, the European Central Bank, and the Bank of Japan, have continued to raise their policy rates since the beginning of the year.
Financial markets expect a further tightening of monetary policy in these countries over the remainder of 2007 and into early 2008.
Through the first quarter of 2007, the Canadian dollar traded in the range of about 84.5 to 87.5 cents US assumed in the projection presented in the January Update.
However, since early April, the Canadian dollar has moved above this range as a result of several developments, including the rise in commodity prices and relatively stronger economic data in Canada than in the United States.
Corporate profitability in Canada remains robust.
Balance sheets in the Canadian non-financial business sector continue to improve, buoyed by rising profit margins.
Profits have also been very strong in the financial sector since the October Report.
Against this backdrop, credit conditions for businesses remain accommodative.
Despite high corporate profits, which have dampened the demand for credit, business borrowing since the January Update has expanded at a rate close to its historical average, partly reflecting increased demand for short-term financing related to mergers and acquisitions, as well as robust capital spending.
The healthy outlook for the global economy should help to sustain the strong profitability of Canadian businesses.
To the extent that credit spreads remain low, firms should continue to have ready access to funding for investment.
Household credit continues to expand at a rate well above its historical average.
Rising house prices have improved the net worth of households and have facilitated cheaper access to borrowed funds.
Total new borrowing against home equity has tripled in volume since 2001 and has contributed to the strength of household spending over this period.
Since the January Update, the growth in housing prices has moderated somewhat, but past increases have allowed household borrowing to remain robust.
Despite higher indebtedness, households remain in sound financial health, with a relatively low debt-service ratio for the sector as a whole and only a small proportion of financially vulnerable households.
Healthy household balance sheets, together with favourable employment conditions and ready access to borrowed funds, suggest that robust credit growth should continue to support household spending.
Since January, the growth rate of the monetary aggregates has remained high.
The growth of broad money (M2++) is consistent with a core rate of inflation slightly above 2 per cent at the end of 2007 and into early 2008.
At the same time, the break-even inflation rate implicit in the spread between nominal and Real Return government bonds has moved up slightly.
Liquidity and technical factors, however, make this spread difficult to interpret.
This section describes the Bank's outlook for the global and Canadian economies through to the end of 2009.
The base-case projection has been developed assuming a slow and orderly resolution of global imbalances, predicated on further supportive policy actions to rebalance global demand and a gradual real effective depreciation of the US dollar.
Energy prices are assumed to evolve in line with current futures prices, and the Canadian dollar is assumed to trade within the range of 86.5 to 89.5 cents US, evident since early April.
With the projection horizon extended to 2009, demographic effects related to an aging workforce begin to modestly reduce the assumption for the growth of potential output, not only in Canada, but for many industrialized countries.
Since the January Update, global economic growth has been slightly stronger than expected, with slower growth in US real GDP more than offset by stronger-than-expected growth outside North America.
As global capacity becomes fully absorbed and monetary policy tightens, this vigorous expansion is projected to moderate gradually from 5.3 per cent in 2006, to 4.8 per cent in 2007 and 2008, and to 4.6 per cent in 2009.
This growth projection is slightly higher than that presented in the October Report and the January Update.
Growth in Japan and the major European economies is expected to remain solid over the projection period, with more growth coming from domestic consumption and investment demand, rather than from net exports.
The outlook for growth in emerging-market countries over the same period also remains very strong, particularly for China and India.
The slowdown in the US economy in 2007 is expected to be more prolonged than projected in the January Update.
As a result, US GDP growth is expected to slow to 2.1 per cent in 2007, before picking up to 2.8 per cent in 2008 and to 3.1 per cent in 2009.
The downward revision in 2007 (from 2.5 per cent in the January Update to 2.1 per cent) largely reflects a more prolonged downturn in residential investment and weaker business investment.
The growth rate of US potential output is now expected to slow from about 3 per cent over recent years to slightly below 3 per cent over the 2007-09 period.
With the slowing of US GDP growth to well below potential growth since the middle of 2006, some excess supply has started to emerge in the US economy.
Thus, core inflation should gradually fall, although less quickly than previously expected.
As inventory adjustments in the manufacturing sector are completed and the drag from weak residential and business investment dissipates, US GDP growth is expected to recover to close to potential growth by the end of 2007.
Over the projection horizon, growth in US household consumption is expected to moderate, as savings return to a more sustainable level.
The depreciation of the US dollar in real effective terms since 2002, as well as a further expected depreciation of about 8 per cent over the projection horizon, should continue to stimulate US net exports.
Strong foreign demand should further support US exports, contributing to a gradual reduction in the US current account deficit.
Futures prices for crude oil and natural gas over the projection period are higher than those in the January Update.
They indicate that crude oil prices will move up from their current level of about US$63 per barrel to US$70 per barrel by early 2008 and then stay there for the remainder of next year and through 2009.
The price index for non-energy commodities is high and is expected to remain higher than projected in January, before declining gradually over the projection period.
In particular, while strong global demand is boosting metals prices, these prices are expected to decrease slowly as increases in global capacity come online.
Lumber prices are likely to ease over the remainder of this year, given the projected weakness of US housing activity.
In Canada, final domestic demand is expected to continue to be the primary engine of growth over the projection period, growing at a robust, though more moderate, pace than in 2005 and 2006.
Consumer spending is expected to grow solidly over the projection period, reflecting further gains in real disposable income and increases in household net worth.
Housing investment, after reaching a very high level last year, is projected to decline slightly in 2007 and 2008 and then to steady out in 2009.
Gains in business investment are expected to remain strong in 2007 and 2008, with growth averaging just over 5 per cent.
Factors contributing to higher investment spending this year and next include near-term pressures on production capacity, expectations of relatively strong global economic growth and high levels for most commodity prices, ongoing supportive financial conditions, and generally strong profit levels with solid balance sheets.
However, capital spending in the oil and gas industry is expected to ease somewhat in the near term, owing to a weaker outlook for gas drilling.
In 2009, overall growth in investment is projected to ease as a result of the anticipated moderation in global economic growth and lower prices for non-energy commodities.
In the base-case projection, it is assumed that the government sector will run balanced budgets throughout the projection period, and that the real growth of government spending on goods and services will decelerate to average just under 3 per cent through 2009.
As growth in US domestic demand slows through mid-2007, Canadian exports are expected to ease slightly in the first half of 2007.
But with the projected subsequent strengthening of US growth, Canada's exports should pick up over the remainder of the projection period.
In contrast, further substantial increases in investment in machinery and equipment should contribute to continued strong growth in imports throughout 2007 and 2008.
Hence, net exports are projected to exert a slightly greater drag on overall growth in 2007 than projected in the January Update, with this drag diminishing over the course of the year.
In the Bank's base-case projection, economic growth increases through 2007, with quarterly growth averaging just below 2 1/2 per cent in the first half of the year and just above 2 1/2 per cent in the second half.
This implies average annual growth for 2007 of 2.2 per cent, slightly lower than in the January Update, largely reflecting the impact of the weaker US economic outlook on Canadian export growth.
For 2008 and 2009, GDP growth is projected at 2.7 per cent.
In the base-case scenario for Canada, the assumption for potential output growth in both 2007 and 2008 remains unchanged at 2.8 per cent.
For 2009, growth of the labour supply is assumed.
to ease slightly by 0.1 per cent from 1.25 per cent in 2007 and 2008, implying potential growth of about 2.7 per cent.
This 0.1 percentage point reduction in potential growth in 2009 reflects the Governing Council's judgment regarding the impact on the labour force of increased retirements as the first members of the baby-boom generation enter their early sixties.
With these growth profiles for GDP and potential growth, the economy would move back to its production capacity in the second half of 2007 and stay there for the remainder of the projection period.
In this base-case projection, it is chiefly the recent slowdown and subsequent pickup of the US economy that bring aggregate supply and demand in Canada back into balance and keep them there.
The Bank's projection is that core inflation will remain above 2 per cent in the coming months, but return to 2 per cent by the end of 2007 and stay there for the rest of the projection period.
With medium - and longer-term expectations of inflation well anchored, the inflation projection largely reflects the combined influence of the balance between aggregate demand and supply, and relative price developments.
Excess demand through late 2006 and into 2007, combined with the projected momentum in core food prices, is expected to keep core inflation above 2 per cent in the near term.
But two factors are expected to bring core inflation back to 2 per cent, despite a projected lessening of the downward pressure from import prices.
First, the upward pressure coming from the economy operating slightly above its potential output is expected to dissipate, since excess demand is projected to be eliminated in the second half of 2007.
Second, the significant contribution to inflation coming from housing price increases is expected to continue to decline.
The projected path for the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI reflects both the slightly higher projected track for core inflation in 2007 and expectations for energy prices, as well as changes in indirect taxes.
Total CPI inflation is expected to be 1.9 per cent in the second quarter of 2007.
With the direct effect of the GST cut ending in July 2007, upward-sloping futures curves for crude oil and natural gas prices and marked year-over-year increases in gasoline prices, total CPI inflation is projected to move up in the second half of 2007, peaking in the fourth quarter of 2007 at about 2.8 per cent.
Thereafter, total CPI inflation is expected to decline, returning to the 2 per cent target by mid-2008 and staying there for the remainder of the projection period.
This inflation projection is consistent with an unchanged target for the overnight interest rate, largely because the impact of the current slowdown in US GDP growth on the Canadian economy is sufficient to bring total demand for goods and services in Canada back into line with supply.
The upside risk is that the recent strength in inflation could prove to be more persistent than is envisaged in the base-case projection.
Pressures on capacity may be greater than judged and may be more persistent than projected.
The observed strength in household credit growth and broad money growth in Canada continues to point to this upside risk.
There is also a risk of greater international price pressures.
The downward pressure on the core inflation rate from decreases in the prices of internationally traded manufactured goods could diminish more quickly than projected, especially if global growth continues to come in stronger than expected.
The downside risk to the outlook for Canadian growth and inflation continues to be that growth in the US economy could be lower than expected.
This arises from the possibility of an even more pronounced slowdown in residential and business investment in the United States, which could spill over into weaker consumption growth.
Finally, from a longer-term perspective, there remains a small probability of a disorderly resolution of global imbalances.
While the improving balance in the global distribution of domestic demand will be helpful in supporting necessary adjustment, further policy actions are required internationally to facilitate an orderly resolution of global imbalances.
Economic growth and inflation in Canada in the first half of this year have been stronger than expected in the April Monetary Policy Report.
Final domestic demand has remained the key driver of economic growth in Canada, bolstered by firm commodity prices.
The Bank judges that the economy is now operating further above its production potential than was projected at the time of the April Report.
Both total CPI and core inflation have been higher than projected in April and are above the 2 per cent inflation target.
Longer-term interest rates have increased, and the Canadian dollar has appreciated sharply, moving well above the trading range assumed in the last Report.
The Canadian economy is now projected to grow by 2.5 per cent in 2007, somewhat stronger than was expected in April, and to grow somewhat more slowly in 2008 and 2009 than previously projected.
In this new projection, higher interest rates across the yield curve and a higher assumed range for the Canadian dollar of 93 to 95.5 cents US act to moderate growth in 2008 and 2009 to an average of about 2 1/2 per cent.
This brings aggregate demand and supply back into balance in 2009.
Inflation is projected to be slightly higher and more persistent than in the April Report.
However, as excess demand diminishes, total CPI and core inflation should decline to 2 per cent by early 2009.
Also contributing to the decline in inflation are greater downward pressure on import prices related to the stronger Canadian dollar, and continued deceleration in the pace of price increases for new houses.
With the direct effect of the GST cut ending and the impact of the temporary easing in gasoline prices in late 2006, total inflation is projected to peak at about 3 per cent in the fourth quarter of this year.
The Bank's new projection for inflation is subject to both upside and downside risks.
The main upside risk is that household demand in Canada could be stronger than projected, which could attenuate the downward pressure on inflation from lower import prices and from the deceleration in the pace of price increases for new houses.
Higher levels of household borrowing and broad money growth point to this risk.
On the downside, the adjustment in the Canadian economy to the rapid appreciation of the Canadian dollar may dampen demand for Canadian goods and services and reduce inflationary pressures more than projected.
As well, the ongoing adjustment in the US housing sector could be more prolonged, and this could spill over to the US economy more broadly, further dampening Canadian exports.
Overall, the upside and downside risks to the Bank's projection for inflation appear to be roughly balanced.
In line with this outlook, the Bank of Canada raised its key policy interest rate to 4.5 per cent on 10 July.
Some modest further increase in the overnight rate may be required to bring inflation back to target over the medium term.
Economic growth outside North America has generally been more robust than expected at the time of the April Report.
Emerging-market economies, particularly China and India, continue to outperform expectations.
Over the past few months, the economic expansion in Europe and Japan has also been stronger than anticipated, with further strengthening in domestic demand.
The US economy has evolved essentially in line with expectations.
Following a weaker-than-anticipated first quarter, growth looks to have rebounded in the second quarter.
Activity in the housing sector continues to decrease, but business investment appears to be regaining momentum.
Moreover, growth in household consumption has remained firm, suggesting that there has been no significant spillover from the ongoing adjustment in the housing sector.
In general, most of the recent data have been consistent with a return of the economy to near potential growth, while US inflation has moderated somewhat.
With ongoing strength in global demand and concerns about supplies, oil prices have moved higher.
Other commodity prices have generally remained high, largely in line with the assumptions in the April Report.
In Canada, economic growth picked up markedly in the first quarter of 2007, with real GDP increasing at an annual rate of 3.7 per cent.
This was stronger than the 2.5 per cent growth projected in the April Report.
In spite of the weak growth in the US economy in the first quarter of 2007, Canada's export volumes were higher than expected.
Inventory investment was also higher than projected.
Final domestic demand continued to be the key driver of economic growth in Canada in the first quarter.
Real personal disposable income rose substantially, owing mainly to strong growth in employment.
The net worth of households also continued to rise, partly reflecting the impact of the strength in Canada's terms of trade.
This was accompanied by further strong growth in household credit.
These developments underpinned a considerable increase in household spending.
Furthermore, the inventory correction that had been a significant drag on growth in the last half of 2006 was completed by early 2007.
Based on available information, real GDP appears to have increased at an annual rate of 2.8 per cent in the second quarter of 2007, higher than the 2.3 per cent rate projected in the April Report.
In particular, both consumer spending and exports showed strong momentum early in the quarter.
Several indicators suggest that the amount of excess demand in the Canadian economy increased in the second quarter of 2007 relative to that expected at the time of the April Report.
In the Bank's latest Business Outlook Survey, the percentage of companies reporting that they would have difficulty in meeting an unanticipated increase in demand rose to the highest level since mid-2000.
The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap indicates that the economy was operating about 0.6 per cent above its production capacity in the second quarter of 2007, noticeably higher than projected in the April Report.
A number of indicators continue to suggest tightness in labour markets, and measures of underlying labour costs have increased somewhat.
The employment-to-population ratio is at a record high, and the unemployment rate is at a 33-year low.
However, the percentage of firms reporting labour shortages in the recent Business Outlook Survey declined.
After reviewing all the indicators of capacity pressures, the Governing Council judges that, overall, the economy was operating about half a per cent above its production capacity in the second quarter of 2007.
Inflation has been higher than projected in the April Report and the January Update.
This is consistent with evidence of greater excess demand in the Canadian economy.
It also reflects some relative price movements.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI moved up from 1.8 per cent in the first quarter of 2007 to 2.2 per cent in April and May.
This higher-than-projected rise in the total CPI resulted from the higher-than-expected core rate of inflation and from further increases in the prices of some of the volatile components.
Gasoline prices were higher, chiefly because of refinery closures and unexpected strength in demand.
Fruit and vegetable prices were also higher.
The core rate of inflation averaged 2.4 per cent in April and May, 0.2 percentage points higher than projected for the second quarter in the April Report.
The rate of increase in the prices for core services excluding shelter has risen, reflecting strong demand pressures.
Prices and markups for clothing and other semi-durable goods have also been higher than expected.
Increases in shelter costs, while remaining relatively high, have continued to ease, largely as expected, reflecting a deceleration in price increases for new houses.
Since the April Report, longer-term interest rates have increased in many economies.
The increase largely reflects expectations of higher real interest rates, consistent with the outlook for continued strong global economic growth.
Expectations for policy rates have also generally moved up.
In Canada, growth in household credit remains robust, and growth in business credit has moved above its historical average since the April Report.
Monetary aggregates have also grown robustly.
The Canadian dollar has appreciated sharply, trading between 93 and 95.5 cents US since the May policy announcement.
The current value of the Canadian dollar is well above the range of 86.5 to 89.5 cents US assumed in the projection in the April Report.
Much of this appreciation reflects the strength of demand for Canadian goods and services and continuing firm commodity prices.
However, the currency appears to have moved more strongly in response to these factors than historical experience would suggest.
The Bank's base-case projection incorporates the following key assumptions: a gradual and orderly resolution of global imbalances, energy prices evolving in line with current futures prices, and a Canada/US exchange rate in the range of 93 to 95.5 cents US observed since the May policy announcement.
The outlook for the global economy is slightly stronger than in the April Report, with growth expected to remain robust over the next three years.
Some deceleration is still expected, as global excess supply is reduced and as the impact of ongoing monetary policy tightening is felt.
Global economic growth is projected to ease from 5.0 per cent in 2007 to 4.8 per cent in 2008, and to 4.6 per cent in 2009.
The projection for the US economy is little changed from that in the April Report.
GDP growth is expected to slow from about 3.3 per cent in 2006 to about 2.1 per cent in 2007.
Lower residential investment is likely to continue to reduce GDP growth over the coming quarters.
However, US exports should be supported by stronger growth in domestic demand in other countries and by a depreciating US dollar, and business investment is picking up.
GDP growth is projected to be about 3 per cent in 2008 and 2009.
Futures prices for crude oil have increased relative to those in the April Report.
The price index for non-energy commodities is at a high level and is still expected to ease gradually over the projection period.
In the Bank's projection for Canada, GDP growth is somewhat stronger in 2007 and somewhat weaker in 2008 and 2009 than was projected in the April Report.
Quarterly growth is expected to average about 2 3/4 per cent at annual rates for the final three quarters of this year and about 2 1/2 per cent through 2008 and 2009.
Final domestic demand in Canada is expected to remain the key driver of economic growth over the projection period, supported by the strength of Canada's terms of trade and high levels of employment.
Growth in investment in machinery and equipment should continue to boost imports.
Although the gradual strengthening of the US economy over the projection period is supportive of Canadian exports, export growth is expected to be weaker than previously projected owing to the higher Canadian dollar.
On balance, net exports are expected to subtract from growth in 2008 and 2009.
Compared with the April Report, this projection includes higher interest rates across the yield curve and a higher exchange rate, both of which act to moderate growth and bring aggregate demand and supply in Canada back into balance in 2009.
The projection for core inflation for 2007 and 2008 is slightly higher than in the April Report.
Greater excess demand than was expected in April is projected to keep core inflation above 2 per cent for a longer period.
But three factors should bring core inflation back to 2 per cent by early 2009.
First, with economic activity moderating somewhat in 2008 and 2009, excess demand pressures are slowly worked off.
Second, with the stronger Canadian dollar, downward pressure on inflation from lower import prices is expected to be a little greater than earlier projected.
And finally, the contribution to inflation coming from price increases for new houses is expected to continue to decline.
The projected path for the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI reflects the revised outlook for the core rate, expectations for energy prices, and the effect of past changes in indirect taxes.
With the higher futures prices for oil and the direct effect of the GST cut on inflation ending, total CPI inflation is projected to rise further in the second half of this year.
Considerable year-over-year increases in gasoline prices, owing partly to the impact of the temporary easing in gasoline prices in late 2006, will cause total CPI inflation to peak in the fourth quarter at about 3 per cent.
CPI inflation is then expected to decline, reaching the 2 per cent target by early 2009.
There have been a number of significant economic and financial developments since the time of the July Monetary Policy Report Update.
Against a backdrop of robust global economic expansion and strong commodity prices, growth in the Canadian economy has been stronger than projected with considerable momentum in domestic demand.
The economy is now operating further above its production potential than had been previously expected.
The core rate of inflation, which has been above 2 per cent for the past year, was 2.2 per cent in August.
Total consumer price inflation fell temporarily in August to 1.7 per cent, having been above the 2 per cent inflation target since the spring.
The Bank has revised down its projection for US GDP growth to 1.9 per cent in 2007 and 2.1 per cent in 2008.
US growth is expected to pick up to 3 per cent in 2009.
The Canadian dollar generally traded in a range of 93 to 95.5 cents US in July and August, but since then it has appreciated sharply to as high as US$1.03.
In the Bank's new base-case projection, the Canadian dollar is assumed to average 98 cents US, the midpoint of the range since the July Update.
As well, there has been a tightening of credit conditions stemming from financial market developments this summer.
For Canada, the Bank assumes that the cost of credit for firms and households relative to the overnight rate will be 25 basis points higher over the projection period than it was prior to the summer.
Despite these tighter credit conditions, momentum in domestic demand in Canada is expected to remain strong.
The combined effect of a weaker US outlook and a higher assumed level for the Canadian dollar implies, however, that net exports will exert a more significant drag on the economy in 2008 and 2009 than previously expected.
As a result, the Canadian economy is projected to grow by 2.6 per cent in 2007, 2.3 per cent in 2008, and 2.5 per cent in 2009.
With the economy moving back towards balance, and with the direct effect of the stronger Canadian dollar on consumer prices, core inflation is projected to gradually decline to 2 per cent in the second half of 2008 - slightly earlier than previously expected - and to remain there for the balance of the projection period.
Higher energy prices are expected to push total inflation up sharply in the fourth quarter of 2007 to about 3 per cent.
Inflation is then expected to fall back to the 2 per cent target in the second half of next year and to stay there.
A number of the risks identified in the July Update have been realized to some extent.
Stronger household demand in Canada, a sharper adjustment in the US housing sector, and a stronger Canadian dollar have been reflected in the Bank's new base-case projection.
But significant upside and downside risks to the Bank's inflation projection remain.
On the upside, excess demand in the Canadian economy could persist longer than projected.
This could come from two sources: higher growth in household spending than projected and lower growth in productivity than assumed.
On the downside, if the Canadian dollar were to persist above the level of 98 cents US assumed over the projection horizon for reasons not associated with stronger-than-projected demand for Canadian products, this would result in lower output and inflation.
In addition, the effect of the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar on demand and inflation could be greater than expected, and the effect of the weakness in the US housing sector could be larger than projected.
All factors considered, the Bank judges that the risks to its inflation projection are roughly balanced, with perhaps a slight tilt to the downside.
In addition, the duration and economic repercussions of recent financial market developments and the possibility of a disorderly unwinding of global imbalances represent an uncertainty for the outlook.
Against this backdrop, the Bank left its key policy rate unchanged on 5 September and 16 October at 4.50 per cent.
The Bank judges, at this time, that the current level of the target for the overnight rate is consistent with achieving the inflation target over the medium term.
The underlying rate of inflation has been above 2 per cent over the past year.
Total CPI inflation, which has also been running above 2 per cent since the spring, fell temporarily to 1.7 per cent in August as a result of fluctuations in the prices of some of the more volatile components.
The core rate of inflation, a more reliable indicator of the underlying trend in inflation than total CPI inflation, has averaged 2.3 per cent over the past few months, as projected in the July Update.
This reflected ongoing pressures on production capacity in the economy.
The influence of strong domestic demand was particularly evident in the prices of core services.
Shelter costs rose somewhat more strongly than projected, with greater-than-expected strength outside Alberta.
Core food prices have also continued to rise markedly, owing to the ongoing surge in the prices of grains and oilseeds.
The downward pressure on the core rate coming from lower prices for many import-intensive goods (such as semi-durable and household durable goods) eased still further, but price discounting on automobiles increased.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was below that projected, owing to the prices of some of the more volatile components.
This included gasoline prices, which reflected narrower margins as a result of a faster-than-anticipated return of North American production to more normal levels following supply disruptions last spring.
Natural gas prices were also weaker.
Key measures of inflation expectations remain close to 2 per cent.
The average private sector forecast for total CPI inflation in 2008 is just above 2 per cent.
In the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey, over 80 per cent of firms expected CPI inflation to be within a range of 1 to 3 per cent, on average, over the next two years.
Consensus forecasts of inflation over the longer term continued to be very close to 2 per cent.
Growth in Canada's real GDP picked up markedly in the first half of 2007, rising at an annual rate of 3.7 per cent.
At 3.4 per cent, the increase in real GDP in the second quarter was stronger than the 2.8 per cent projected in the July Update.
This unexpected strength reflected stronger household spending and a smaller-than-expected drag from net exports.
Available information for the third quarter suggests that final domestic demand remained strong but that the drag from net exports increased.
Current data also suggest that real GDP is likely to have grown by about 2.5 per cent, slightly less than the 2.7 per cent projected in the last Update.
Final domestic demand continued to be the major contributor to GDP growth in the first half of 2007.
Real personal disposable income rose solidly, boosted by the strong labour market.
Household net worth continued to rise, reflecting the improvement in Canada's terms of trade and substantial increases in house prices.
And household credit again increased considerably.
These developments underpinned marked increases in household spending, including residential investment.
In contrast, the growth of capital spending by businesses slowed appreciably.
In particular, spending in the oil and gas industry eased, largely as a result of the impact of lower natural gas prices on conventional drilling activity.
Canada's total exports increased moderately in the first half of 2007, with strong gains in exports of energy commodities and products.
At the same time, imports rose more strongly than exports, reflecting the strength of domestic demand and the appreciation of the Canadian dollar over the past few years.
Nevertheless, the drag on growth coming from net exports in the second quarter of 2007 was less than expected.
This outcome appears to have been caused by transitory developments, since early information for the third quarter points to a marked reduction in net exports.
Hours worked in the business sector showed a year-over-year rise of 1.6 per cent in the second quarter of 2007, slightly less than the average growth over the previous three years.
This slight reduction in the growth of hours worked mainly reflected a decrease in the average workweek, while job creation remained relatively robust.
Labour productivity growth in the business sector rose at 0.9 per cent at annual rates in the second quarter of this year, which was still modestly lower than the average growth over the 2004-06 period.
This may be partly attributable to the shift of labour and capital towards the production of both commodities and non-tradable goods and services, since labour and capital may be somewhat less productive during such a period of adjustment.
In the resource sector, relatively high commodity prices continued to encourage the production of resources that are more costly to extract, lowering productivity from what would have otherwise been the case.
The Bank estimates potential output over history by decomposing movements in labour supply and labour productivity into their trend and cyclical components.
After updating its conventional measure with the most recent information, the Bank estimates that potential output growth over the 2004-06 period averaged about 2.5 per cent, marginally less than previously estimated.
Most indicators suggest that the Canadian economy is operating further above its production potential than was projected at the time of the July Update.
The Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey showed that the percentage of firms reporting that they would have difficulty in meeting an unanticipated increase in demand remained at a high level.
The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap indicates that the economy was operating about 0.8 per cent above its production potential in the third quarter of 2007, slightly higher than projected in the July Update.
On the other hand, Statistics Canada's measure of capacity utilization in the non-farm, goods-producing sector indicated that pressure on production capacity was somewhat below average in the second quarter of 2007.
However, the fact that the core rate of inflation has averaged above 2 per cent since September 2006 supports the assessment that the economy was operating above its production capacity.
In September, the employment-to-population ratio matched a record high, while the unemployment rate was at a 33-year low.
The 12-month change in average hourly earnings of permanent workers reported by Statistics Canada in the Labour Force Survey (considered to be a good indicator of the underlying change in aggregate wages) moved back up to between 3 and 4 per cent over the June to September period.
The year-to-year rise in hourly labour compensation from Statistics Canada's Productivity Accounts - a more volatile indicator - also increased even more markedly to 5.7 per cent in the second quarter of 2007.
With the strong gains in hourly compensation in the business sector, unit labour costs in the second quarter of 2007 were up 4.8 per cent from their level a year earlier.
The percentage of firms reporting labour shortages in the Bank's autumn survey was up from the preceding survey.
After reviewing all the indicators of capacity pressures, it is the Governing Council's judgment that, overall, the economy was operating about 0.75 of a per cent above its production capacity in the third quarter of 2007.
Over the past few months, global prices for non-energy commodities have eased a little from the peak reached in May, but, overall, remain at high levels.
Metals prices fell back, partly reflecting the tightening in global credit conditions, but have since recovered.
As well, the ongoing downturn in the US housing market has contributed to further reductions in the demand for lumber.
In contrast, grains and oilseeds prices have continued to strengthen, owing mainly to the impact of unfavourable weather conditions on global supplies.
The price of light crude oil (West Texas Intermediate), which was about US$72 per barrel at the time of the July Update, averaged US$81 in the 10 days ending on 12 October 2007.
This increase chiefly reflected the combination of continued vigorous global demand and relatively little adjustment in short-term supply.
Canada's terms of trade rebounded in the first half of 2007, reflecting substantial gains in the prices of non-energy commodities.
As a result, the four-quarter change in the chain price index for GDP (a broad price measure of the goods and services produced in Canada) increased from 0.9 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2006 to 3.5 per cent in the second quarter of 2007.
With the chain price index for domestic demand growing at a slower 2.5 per cent pace in the second quarter, this implies a boost in real incomes in Canada.
The terms of trade are expected to stay high in the second half of 2007, and this should contribute to sustained growth in nominal GDP and, hence, in corporate profits and government tax revenues.
In recent months, greater-than-anticipated losses related to US subprime mortgages have triggered a number of developments in global financial markets.
There has been greater uncertainty about the valuation of structured financial products, and investors have shifted into lower-risk government bonds and treasury bills, causing credit spreads to increase.
Financial institutions and businesses in major industrialized countries, including Canada, have faced higher short-term interest rates.
Against the background of these developments, the Bank of Canada has undertaken routine operations on a number of occasions to provide liquidity in support of the efficient functioning of Canada's financial markets and to maintain the overnight rate close to the 4.50 per cent target.
Although the dislocations in financial markets have diminished somewhat since August, heightened uncertainty is still affecting money markets.
Canadian financial institutions are facing substantially increased funding needs.
With the recent disruptions in securitization markets, banks have taken steps to support their own asset-backed commercial paper programs and, as a result, most are holding substantially higher-than-normal amounts of this paper in inventory.
In addition, banks are being called upon to provide loans and backup credit under pre-committed lines to corporations that have stopped accessing market funding.
While Canadian banks have sufficient capital and liquidity available to meet their funding commitments, they are incurring higher funding costs, which have led to tighter credit conditions.
This tightening is reflected in the price, availability, and terms of credit for businesses and households.
For some businesses, however, the upward pressure on the overall cost of capital emanating from higher borrowing costs has been mitigated somewhat by some downward pressure on the cost of equity financing, given buoyant stock markets.
Since then, banks have modestly tightened their terms of credit to firms and the pricing of credit to both firms and households.
These developments are likely to have a dampening effect on borrowing.
Growth of the broad monetary aggregates has remained robust since the July Update and points to upward pressure on inflation through 2008.
In the United States, the Federal Reserve lowered the target for the federal funds rate by 50 basis points on 18 September, and short-term rates embody expectations of a further modest reduction in coming months.
Markets are pricing in a likelihood of a modest hike in policy rates by the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan in coming months.
In Canada, market expectations, based on short-term interest rates, currently suggest little change in the policy rate in the coming months.
Through July and August, the Canadian dollar generally traded in the range of 93 to 95.5 cents US assumed in the July Update, but since then has appreciated sharply, moving as high as US$1.03.
The recent movement partly reflects the broad-based weakness in the US dollar (against the currencies of its main trading partners with flexible exchange rates).
This has occurred against the background of a weaker outlook for economic growth and inflation and a lower policy interest rate in the United States.
In addition, the Canadian dollar continues to be supported by firm commodity prices, particularly oil, and strong domestic demand.
That said, the magnitude of the recent appreciation appears to have been stronger than historical experience would have suggested.
This section describes the Bank's outlook for the global and Canadian economies through 2009.
First, it is assumed that over the projection period, the Canadian dollar will average 98 cents US, the midpoint of the range since the July Update of 93 to 103 cents US.
Second, energy prices are assumed to evolve along a path that is consistent with current futures prices.
Third, global credit conditions are assumed to remain tighter.
For Canada, it is assumed that the cost of credit to firms and households, relative to the overnight rate, will remain around 25 basis points higher overall than it was prior to the recent financial market turbulence.
Fourth, trend labour productivity in Canada is assumed to grow at 1.5 per cent over the projection period.
The global economy expanded at a strong pace in the first three quarters of 2007, led by developing economies.
Annual average global economic growth for 2007 is now projected to be somewhat higher than in the July Update.
Over 2008 and 2009, the strength of global economic growth is still expected to ease modestly.
Economic growth in Japan and the euro zone has been slightly weaker than expected, but the slowdown in investment that underlies this weakness is likely to be short lived, since business balance sheets and profits are generally strong.
In addition, ongoing improvements in labour markets will continue to support household spending.
Overall, economic growth in Japan and the euro zone is expected to be close to their growth in potential over the next few years, despite some near-term effects related to current financial conditions and weaker US demand.
Economic growth in the United Kingdom has been stronger than anticipated in the first half of the year, but recent financial events are expected to slow growth to closer to potential over the near term.
Inflationary pressures appear to be building in China, with higher prices for basic commodities such as food and energy.
Chinese authorities have implemented measures to restrain aggregate demand and price increases, although further actions are assumed.
The projection for US GDP growth has been revised down to 1.9 per cent in 2007 and 2.1 per cent in 2008, considerably weaker than the 2.1 and 3.0 per cent projected in the July Update.
The economy is then expected to rebound in 2009.
The recent evidence of larger-than-expected declines in activity in the US housing sector implies a deeper and more prolonged adjustment in residential investment relative to earlier projections.
The weakness in the housing sector is expected to reduce other consumption expenditures, but this impact will be somewhat mitigated by the recent lowering of US interest rates.
At the same time, the cumulative real effective depreciation of the currency will continue to boost US net exports and will also provide some offset to the weaker domestic demand overall.
In light of recent downward revisions to historical growth in real GDP and labour productivity in the United States, the Bank has revised down its estimate of potential output growth to 2.8 per cent for 2007 and to 2.6 per cent over the rest of the projection period.
This implies that the excess supply currently present in the US economy is expected to be eliminated by the end of 2009.
Consistent with the outlook for global growth, the price index for non-energy commodities is expected to decline somewhat over the projection horizon but still be higher than was anticipated in the July Update.
In particular, increases in the global capacity to produce metals are likely to be slower than was earlier expected, but some further modest easing of prices from the very high level reached in the second quarter is still projected.
The prices for grains and oilseeds are now expected to be higher than previously envisaged, while lumber prices are expected to remain low.
Spot prices and futures prices for crude oil have moved up since July.
Prices for crude oil are expected to be near US$80 per barrel through early 2008, before easing to around US$74 per barrel in 2009.
On the other hand, futures prices for natural gas are lower than in the last Update, especially over the near term.
The Bank's current base-case projection for Canada, when compared with that in the July Update, sees the level of economic activity higher at mid-2007, but growth somewhat weaker through the second half of 2007 and the first half of 2008.
Continued robust growth in incomes, supported by high commodity prices and tight labour markets, is expected to sustain robust growth in domestic demand.
But three factors are expected to dampen the projection for GDP growth: the weaker US economic outlook, the higher assumed level for the Canadian dollar and, to a much lesser degree, the impact of the modest tightening of credit conditions.
Quarterly growth is expected to average just over 2 per cent in the second half of 2007 and the first half of 2008, before edging up close to the growth of production capacity by the beginning of 2009.
GDP growth, on an average annual basis, is projected at 2.6 per cent in 2007, before easing to 2.3 per cent in 2008 and then moving up to 2.5 per cent in 2009.
Growth in final domestic demand is expected to continue to contribute importantly to economic expansion in the second half of 2007 and through 2008 and 2009.
Consumer spending is projected to grow solidly over the projection period as a result of ongoing gains in both real disposable income and household net worth.
Housing investment, after a further moderate increase to a very high level this year, is projected to decline slightly in 2008.
In this base-case outlook, the tightening of credit conditions is tempering the momentum in household spending.
The tightening of credit conditions is also expected to lead some businesses to postpone some capital spending into 2009.
Factors contributing to continued growth in business investment include pressures on production capacity, high levels for many commodity prices, strong profitability and solid balance sheets, and decreased prices of imported machinery and equipment.
The real growth of government spending on goods and services is expected to average just under 3 per cent through 2009.
While the growth in imports is expected to be robust over the projection period, the growth of Canadian exports is expected to be weak, owing to the projected slower growth of US domestic demand to the end of 2008 and to the higher assumed level of the Canadian dollar.
In particular, the tightening of credit conditions in the US mortgage market will have a larger and more persistent adverse impact on demand for Canadian exports, especially building materials and consumer goods.
On balance, net exports are expected to exert a larger drag on overall growth than was the case in the last Update.
With labour supply growth declining by about 0.1 per cent per year from 1.25 per cent in 2008, and trend productivity assumed to grow at a rate of 1.5 per cent, the assumption for potential output growth is 2.8 per cent in 2008 and 2.7 per cent in 2009, as in the July Update.
The degree of pressure on production capacity at the beginning of the projection period is slightly higher than in the July Update.
With these growth profiles for GDP and potential output, the economy would remain in excess demand through to early 2009.
The effects of a weaker US outlook and the higher assumed Canadian dollar, combined with a modest tightening in credit conditions, more than offset the stronger momentum in domestic demand, bringing aggregate demand back into line with aggregate supply a little more quickly than projected in the July Update.
The core rate of inflation is expected to remain above 2 per cent through mid-2008, and then ease to 2 per cent in the second half of next year, staying there for the remainder of the projection period.
With weaker economic growth, excess demand pressures are expected to gradually dissipate.
This should contribute to more moderate growth in the price of services, and the contribution to inflation coming from rising house prices is expected to diminish.
The direct impact of the stronger Canadian dollar is also expected to contribute to modest additional downward pressure on inflation through lower import prices, and, as a result, the core rate is expected to return to the 2 per cent target a little earlier than in the last Update.
The outlook for the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI reflects both the slightly revised projected track for core inflation and expectations for energy prices.
Total CPI inflation in the first half of 2008 is somewhat higher than in the last Update, owing to higher futures prices for crude oil.
Total CPI inflation is expected to rise sharply over the remainder of this year to about 3 per cent in the fourth quarter.
This reflects both the impact of the reduction in gasoline prices in late 2006 and the recent rise in spot and futures prices for crude oil, although this latter effect is tempered by the exchange rate appreciation and narrower margins seen recently.
Thereafter, total CPI inflation is expected to move back close to the 2 per cent target in the second half of 2008 and stay there over the remainder of the projection period.
There have been a number of significant economic and financial developments since the July Update.
Reflecting these developments, a number of the risks to the Bank's projection identified at that time have been realized to some extent.
Stronger household demand, a sharper adjustment in the US housing sector, and a stronger Canadian dollar have been reflected in the Bank's new base-case projection.
On the upside, the excess demand in the domestic economy may persist longer than projected, putting upward pressure on inflation.
This risk could come from two sources: higher growth in household spending than projected and lower growth in productivity than assumed.
Weaker growth in labour productivity would translate into lower potential output growth than assumed in the base-case projection and, hence, greater upward pressure on unit labour costs and inflation.
On the downside, if the Canadian dollar exchange rate were to persist above the assumed level of 98 cents US over the projection horizon for reasons not associated with stronger-than-projected demand for Canadian products, Canadian output and inflation would be lower.
In addition, the base-case projection might underestimate the implications for demand for Canadian goods and services of the cumulative effect of the past appreciation of the exchange rate, given the considerable adjustment it entails for the Canadian economy.
Prices for consumer goods could be lower than projected if competitive pressures induce a greater pass-through of the exchange rate appreciation.
There is also a possibility that the more pronounced slowdown in the US housing sector could have a larger-than-projected impact on consumption, further reducing US demand for Canadian exports.
All factors considered, the Bank judges that the risks to the projection for inflation are roughly balanced, with perhaps a slight tilt to the downside.
The future evolution and economic repercussions of ongoing global financial market developments represent an uncertainty for the outlook.
The Canadian economy grew broadly in line with the Bank's expectations in the second half of 2007.
Despite some slowing in growth in the fourth quarter, the economy continues to operate above its production capacity.
Both total and core inflation have been lower than was projected in the October Monetary Policy Report, largely reflecting a price-level adjustment related to increased competitive pressures in the retail sector stemming from the level of the Canadian dollar.
Financial conditions have deteriorated since October, leading to a tightening of credit conditions in industrialized countries.
Given this, and a deeper and more prolonged decline in the US housing sector, the outlook for the US economy in 2008 is now significantly weaker than it was in October.
Growth is expected to be particularly weak in the first half of the year before recovering later in 2008 and 2009.
For Canada, the effects of the slowing US economy will lead to additional downward pressure on export growth.
However, despite tighter credit conditions, domestic demand in Canada is expected to remain strong, supported by continued income growth associated with the increase in commodity prices seen since October, which has led to further gains in Canada's terms of trade.
The Bank now projects that economic growth in 2008 will be weaker than was expected in October, averaging a little over 1 per cent in the first half of the year and a little over 2 per cent in the second half.
On an average annual basis, the economy is projected to expand by 1.8 per cent in 2008 and by 2.8 per cent in 2009.
This growth profile implies that the economy will move into modest excess supply in the second quarter of this year, and then return to balance in early 2010.
The inflation projection has also been revised down, particularly for 2008, primarily reflecting the price-level adjustment noted above and the recent one-percentage-point reduction in the GST.
Both core and total CPI inflation are projected to fall below 1.5 per cent by the middle of this year before returning to the 2 per cent target by the end of 2009.
Excluding the impact of the recent GST reduction, total CPI inflation is projected to average close to 2 per cent throughout 2008 and 2009.
There are a number of important risks to this base-case projection.
On the downside, the tightening in credit conditions globally and in Canada could be greater and more protracted than assumed, and there could be a more prolonged slowdown in the US economy, exerting a greater drag on Canadian GDP growth and inflation.
As well, competitive pressures in Canada's retail sector could put more downward pressure on prices than assumed.
On the upside, there are risks posed by the continued strong momentum in domestic demand growth, underpinned by firm commodity prices, improved terms of trade, and strong credit growth.
Capacity pressures could be stronger than judged, especially if weak productivity growth were to persist, which would put upward pressure on costs and inflation.
The Governing Council judges that, overall, the risks to the base-case projection for Canadian inflation are roughly balanced.
On 4 December and on 22 January, the Bank lowered its target for the overnight rate by one-quarter of one percentage point, bringing it to 4 per cent.
In line with the Bank's outlook, further monetary stimulus is likely to be required in the near term to keep aggregate supply and demand in balance and to return inflation to target over the medium term.
Global economic growth remained strong through the third quarter of 2007.
During the fourth quarter, however, there was a slowing in the global economy, most notably in the United States.
The ongoing repricing of risk and tightening of credit conditions in industrialized countries, largely stemming from problems in the US subprime-mortgage market, contributed to the slowdown.
Upward pressure on global inflation continued, exacerbated by large increases in the prices of energy and food.
Economic strength through the third quarter was broadly based across all major regions and was generally greater than expected.
In the United States, economic growth in the third quarter was driven by unexpectedly high business spending and inventory accumulation, and by the rapid expansion of net exports in response to strong global demand and the depreciation of the US dollar.
Available information on the US economy suggests that activity slowed in the fourth quarter as a result of the continued weakness in the housing sector, lower production to reduce inventory levels (particularly in the automobile sector), and the adverse effects of tighter credit conditions.
With continuing strong global demand for oil and little significant supply adjustment, crude oil prices have moved higher.
Prices for grains and oilseeds have also continued to rise, reflecting both strong growth in demand from major emerging economies and unfavourable supply developments.
Many other commodity prices have also remained high.
In the second half of 2007, the Canadian economy grew broadly in line with the Bank's expectations.
Economic growth in Canada eased in the third quarter, with real GDP growing at an annual rate of 2.9 per cent, slightly stronger than the 2.5 per cent projected in the October Report.
Inventory investment was higher than expected, contributing importantly to overall growth, and, once again, there was a considerable rise in final domestic demand.
Both business investment and government spending on goods and services were boosted in the third quarter by large purchases of machinery and equipment from abroad.
Real personal disposable income increased moderately, while household net worth rose further, and household credit continued to record substantial increases.
As a result, household spending rose solidly, after a very strong gain in the second quarter.
Net exports decreased markedly in the third quarter.
Import volumes increased substantially in response to strong domestic demand and the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
Export volumes rose modestly, however, as the exchange rate appreciation moderated the strong global demand for Canadian goods and services.
Current data for the fourth quarter point to another substantial gain in final domestic demand, supported by the rise in real incomes from a boost in the terms of trade that reflected strong commodity prices and the further appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
However, there is likely to be a drag on GDP growth from net exports.
Overall, real GDP is likely to have increased by 1.5 per cent in the fourth quarter.
Inflation in October and November was lower than projected in the October Report.
This appears to largely reflect a price-level adjustment related to increased competitive pressures stemming from the high level of the Canadian dollar.
The core rate of inflation averaged 1.7 per cent in October and November, 0.6 percentage points lower than projected for the fourth quarter in the October Report.
It appears that the Canadian dollar's rise to close to parity with the US dollar raised consumers' awareness of the considerable differences between Canadian and US prices and led to a greater-than-projected downward adjustment of the prices of some goods, particularly automobiles.
Additionally, increases in meat prices were lower than expected, driven by increased supply.
The prices of core services also rose somewhat less than expected.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI moved back up from 1.7 per cent in August 2007 to an average of about 2.5 per cent in October and November, reflecting the temporary reduction in gasoline prices in September and October 2006.
Nevertheless, the growth in total CPI inflation was significantly lower than the 3.0 per cent expected in the October Report, owing to the downward adjustment in core inflation.
Notwithstanding the easing in core inflation, the Canadian economy continues to operate above its production capacity.
The Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey, the conventional measure of the output gap, and most labour market and wage indicators continue to suggest considerable tightness.
After reviewing all the indicators of capacity pressures, the Governing Council judges that, overall, the economy was operating about one-half of a per cent above its production capacity in the last quarter of 2007.
Global financial markets remain volatile as difficulties related to the valuation of structured products and expected losses stemming from the US subprime-mortgage market persist and, more generally, as concerns about the economic outlook have increased.
Canada has been affected by these global developments, but to a lesser extent than the United States and Europe.
While household and business credit have continued to grow robustly in Canada, there has been some tightening in the prices, terms, and availability of credit.
Since late July, financial institutions in Canada and other countries have been facing increased spreads between their money market borrowing rates and expected overnight policy rates.
Although money market conditions worsened after the October Report, partly because of concerns about year-end funding pressures, they have now returned to their October levels.
At the same time, however, there has been a considerable widening in credit spreads in Canadian and global bond markets for financial and non-financial institutions.
For example, for 10-year bonds, the spreads for A-rated Canadian borrowers over yields on Government of Canada bonds have widened from about 100 basis points to around 140 basis points since the October Report.
The spread between the effective household borrowing rate and the expected target overnight rate is estimated to have increased by about 20 to 25 basis points since October.
The spread between the rate at which non-financial firms can borrow from financial institutions and the expected overnight rate has increased by about 15 to 20 basis points since October.
Given the increase in spreads in bond markets, and a tightening in the terms and conditions for bank loans and market debt, there has been a significant tightening in credit conditions faced by firms.
Since the October Report, policy rates have been reduced in both the United States and Canada.
With the weaker economic outlook and further tightening of credit conditions, market expectations in a number of industrialized countries, including Canada and the United States, now reflect significantly lower policy rates for 2008 than at the time of the October Report.
Against a background of significant volatility in currencies, commodity prices, and interest rates since the October Report, and a generally weakening US dollar, the Canadian dollar has exhibited exceptional volatility.
After spiking sharply early in November, the dollar has since declined to trade around the level of 98 cents US assumed in the October Report.
This level is not inconsistent with fundamental factors.
The Bank's base-case projection incorporates the following key assumptions: energy prices evolving in line with current futures prices; as in the October Report, a Canada/US exchange rate averaging 98 cents US; and a gradual and orderly resolution of global imbalances.
The robust expansion of the global economy experienced over the past several years is expected to moderate over 2008-09.
The adverse impact of the tightening of credit conditions in industrialized countries should be partially offset by more accommodative monetary policy than previously expected and by continued strength in emerging-market economies.
Nevertheless, global economic growth is expected to slow somewhat faster than projected in the October Report.
Futures prices for crude oil are higher than those in the October Report, but futures prices for natural gas are largely unchanged.
The price index for non-energy commodities is expected to remain firm, easing somewhat as global growth moderates.
The projection for US GDP growth has been revised down significantly from that in the October Report.
Declining activity in the US housing sector suggests a deeper and more prolonged adjustment in US residential investment and a reduction in home equity values.
Credit conditions are expected to tighten further, reflecting continuing financial market concerns and the weaker economic outlook.
These factors, together with declines in the value of household wealth, are expected to reduce the growth of domestic demand relative to earlier projections.
In this Update, which incorporates the effect of a significant easing in US monetary policy (including some reduction in the policy rate beyond that announced on 22 January), the US economy is projected to grow at a rate below that of potential output in 2008, before recovering gradually in 2009.
Growth in 2008 is expected to be particularly weak in the first half of the year, averaging 0.5 per cent at an annual rate, because of weakness in household spending and residential investment.
Annual US GDP growth is projected to be 1.5 per cent in 2008 and 2.5 per cent in 2009.
For Canada, the Bank's base-case projection is weaker for 2008 but somewhat stronger for 2009 than in the October Report.
Quarterly growth at annual rates is expected to average 1.3 per cent in the first half of 2008 and then move up to 2.3 per cent in the second half of this year, and to just over 3 per cent through 2009.
Final domestic demand is expected to remain the key driver of economic growth over the projection period, supported by high commodity prices, further robust growth in real incomes, and lower policy rates.
Growth of final domestic demand is a little stronger than in the last Report.
But the major change is much weaker net exports.
While import growth is expected to stay robust over the projection period, the outlook for Canadian exports has been marked down, reflecting the weaker US economic outlook.
With the pickup in US GDP growth in 2009, the drag on Canadian economic activity coming from net exports diminishes.
With the weak near-term US outlook and the tighter credit conditions in Canada, the economy moves into modest excess supply in the second quarter of this year.
In this base-case projection, the subsequent strengthening of US economic growth and further near-term reduction in policy interest rates in Canada bring aggregate supply and demand back into balance in early 2010.
The projection for core inflation is lower than in the October Report.
In 2008, this reflects the modest excess supply in the economy for much of the year and continued pressures from lower-than-expected prices for selected tradable goods.
These lower prices are driven by the increased competition related to the high Canadian dollar.
However, with the impact on measured inflation from price-level adjustments dissipating, with well-anchored inflation expectations, and with the economy moving back towards balance, core inflation should move up to 2 per cent by the end of 2009.
The path for the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI over the projection period reflects the revised outlook for core inflation, expectations for energy prices, and the effect of changes in indirect taxes.
The projection for total CPI inflation in 2008 is lower than in the last Report, because of the reduced outlook for core inflation and the estimated direct effect of the one-percentage-point GST reduction (and small changes in other indirect taxes).
This is partly offset by the effect of higher futures prices for crude oil.
Total CPI inflation is expected to fall below the 2 per cent target in early 2008 and remain below the target for the rest of the year, before moving back to 2 per cent by the end of 2009.
Total CPI inflation, excluding the impact of the recent GST reduction, is projected to average close to 2 per cent throughout 2008 and 2009.
Growth in the global economy began to slow in the fourth quarter of 2007 and the first quarter of 2008.
This reflected the effects of the slowdown in the US economy and ongoing dislocations in global financial markets.
Growth in the Canadian economy has also moderated.
Strong domestic demand has been largely offset by sharply reduced net exports.
Both total and core CPI inflation were running at about 1.5 per cent at the end of the first quarter, but the underlying trend of inflation is judged to be about 2 per cent, consistent with an economy that was operating just above its production capacity.
The Bank is projecting a deeper and more protracted slowdown for the US economy than in the January Monetary Policy Report Update.
This projection reflects a more pronounced impact on consumer spending from the contraction in the US housing market and significantly tighter credit conditions.
While a housing-market correction of the size now under way in the United States would typically produce a severe slowdown in GDP growth, several factors are providing some offset.
First, the recently legislated fiscal-stimulus package will support the US economy in the third and fourth quarters.
Second, the depreciation of the US dollar will help spur exports.
Third, substantial easing in US monetary policy should continue to boost GDP growth in 2009 and beyond, particularly as financial market dislocations are worked out.
The deterioration in economic and financial conditions in the United States will have significant spillover effects globally, particularly in the industrial economies.
Emerging-market economies should be less affected by the financial turbulence, and their growing domestic demand should help to offset the effect of weaker exports.
These global developments will have consequences for the Canadian economy.
First, exports are projected to decline this year, exerting a significant drag on GDP growth through the first half, before picking up gradually in the second half of 2008 and in 2009.
Second, turbulence in global financial markets will continue to make financing in capital markets more costly and difficult for Canadian businesses and banks.
The increased bank funding spreads are expected to be further passed on to businesses and households, creating tighter credit conditions through the rest of 2008 that then begin to dissipate in 2009.
Credit conditions are assumed to return to more normal levels in 2010.
The relatively strong capitalization of Canadian financial institutions should mean that credit availability will remain more robust in Canada than in other major markets.
Slowing US domestic demand would be expected to place downward pressure on the prices of many commodities.
This effect will, however, likely be offset to some extent by the combination of continued strong demand from commodity-intensive emerging-market economies and tight supply conditions in many commodity markets.
Financial investors may also reinforce momentum in commodity prices at the margin.
On balance, the prices of non-energy commodities are expected to ease over the projection period from their current very high levels.
Firm commodity prices, high employment levels, and the effect of cumulative easing in monetary policy will continue to support Canada's domestic demand, which is expected to be the key source of economic growth over the projection period.
Overall, the Canadian economy is projected to move into excess supply in the second quarter of this year, and spare capacity will continue to increase through early 2009.
A return to growth rates above that of potential output, supported by a gradual strengthening in the US economy, accommodative monetary policy, and a return to more normal credit conditions bring the economy back into balance around mid-2010.
In the Bank's base-case projection, average annual real GDP growth is projected to be 1.4 per cent in 2008, 2.4 per cent in 2009, and 3.3 per cent in 2010.
The recent price-level adjustments for automobiles and the effect of past changes in indirect taxes will keep measured inflation below target through 2008.
The emergence of excess supply in the economy should keep downward pressure on inflation through 2009.
Both core and total inflation are projected to move up to 2 per cent in 2010, as the economy moves back into balance.
Still, there are a number of upside and downside risks around the Bank's new base-case projection for inflation in Canada.
On the upside, stronger domestic demand than incorporated in the base-case projection, possibly due to higher commodity prices, could lead to higher inflation in Canada, especially if the growth in potential output is lower than assumed.
As well, global inflationary pressures could spill over to Canada through higher import costs.
On the downside, the projected weakness in the United States and other industrialized economies could put greater downward pressure on commodity prices.
There are risks from the evolution of financial market dislocations and their effect on the cost and availability of credit.
There could also be greater direct downward pressure on the prices of core goods related to the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
Against this backdrop, the Bank of Canada lowered its target for the overnight rate by 50 basis points on both 4 March and 22 April, bringing it to 3 per cent.
In line with the new outlook, some further monetary stimulus will likely be required to achieve the inflation target over the medium term.
Given the cumulative reduction of 150 basis points in the target for the overnight rate since December, the timing of any further monetary stimulus will depend on the evolution of the global economy and domestic demand, and their impact on inflation in Canada.
After several years of strong growth, the pace of the global economic expansion slowed in the fourth quarter of 2007 and the first quarter of 2008, particularly in the industrialized economies.
Available information suggests that US economic growth stalled in the first quarter of 2008.
Broad-based declines in residential investment and house prices, coupled with tighter credit conditions and waning consumer confidence in the face of high gasoline prices and a softening labour market, contributed to the marked slowdown in consumer spending.
While strong growth in net exports has provided some offset, business investment has suffered from limited access to credit and weakening consumer demand.
Economic growth in Europe and Japan is slowing.
In Europe, credit conditions have continued to tighten, restraining consumer and business spending.
In newly industrialized and emerging-market economies, particularly China, GDP growth in recent quarters was stronger than expected.
These countries have been less affected by the recent financial turmoil, and their growing domestic demand has so far largely offset the impact of weaker exports to the United States and Europe.
Commodity prices have risen since the January Update, largely as a result of continued strong demand from the emerging economies and constraints on supply.
The prices of non-energy commodities have moved up from already-high levels, with large gains in the prices of grains and oilseeds in response to rising demand for food in emerging economies, increased demand for biofuels, and poor crop yields.
Some of the increases in the prices of metals have been linked to temporary supply disruptions in China and South Africa.
Energy prices have continued to rise sharply in 2008.
The price of light crude oil (West Texas Intermediate), which was about US$90 per barrel at the time of the January Update, increased to average US$112 in the ten days ending on 18 April 2008, reflecting the combination of continued vigorous global demand and some weakness in non-OPEC supplies.
The rise in natural gas prices was partly associated with increased demand stemming from an unusually cold winter in North America.
Economic growth in Canada slowed sharply in the fourth quarter of 2007, following strong expansion through the first three quarters of the year.
The drag coming from net exports intensified over the year, more than offsetting the continuing strength in final domestic demand.
Real GDP increased by 0.8 per cent in the fourth quarter, below the 1.5 per cent growth projected in the January Update.
Available data for the first quarter of 2008 suggest that real GDP growth was about 1.0 per cent, with reductions in inventory investment and net exports offsetting most of the growth in domestic demand.
The dampening effect coming from net exports was very pronounced in the second half of 2007.
At the same time, imports rose very strongly, the result of both robust growth in domestic demand and the past rise in the dollar.
Support for domestic demand came from a continued rise in the terms of trade, reflected in an above-average increase in real incomes of nearly 5 per cent between the fourth quarter of 2006 and the fourth quarter of 2007.
A continued rise in household net worth (boosted by rising house prices) contributed to substantial increases in household borrowing and spending.
Spending by businesses on machinery and equipment also picked up markedly, owing to continued strong profitability, solid balance sheets, and considerable decreases in the prices of imported machinery and equipment.
The tightening of credit conditions in Canada stemming from developments in global financial markets since last August does not appear to have significantly affected either household spending or business investment in the second half of 2007.
Labour productivity in the business sector declined by 0.1 per cent from the fourth quarter of 2006 to the fourth quarter of 2007.
Despite the slower growth of real GDP during the fourth quarter, total hours worked increased at an unusually strong pace.
This puzzling development may reflect factors such as the high adjustment costs associated with reducing employment levels in the manufacturing sector and increased precautionary demand for labour in sectors facing labour shortages.
The impact of high labour utilization on aggregate productivity growth was further amplified by a shift in the share of total hours worked towards low-productivity industries.
The Bank's conventional measure of production capacity indicates that growth in potential output averaged 2.6 per cent in 2007, about the same as previously estimated.
Strong growth in trend labour supply, which has been about 1.7 per cent, offset the effects of weaker trend productivity growth, which is estimated to have added just under 1.0 per cent to potential output growth.
Pressures on production capacity have eased since the third quarter of 2007.
In the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey, the percentage of firms reporting that they would have difficulty in meeting an unanticipated increase in demand has fallen sharply from recent highs to the average level for the survey.
In addition, the Bank's conventional measure of the output gap indicates that the economy was operating about 0.4 per cent above its production potential in the first quarter of 2008, down from just over 1 per cent in the third quarter of last year.
Statistics Canada's indicator of capacity utilization suggests that pressures on production capacity in the non-farm, goods-producing sector were well below average in the fourth quarter of 2007.
The slowdown in the Canadian economy is not yet evident in most labour market and wage indicators.
The employment-to-population ratio was at a record high in both February and March, while the unemployment rate in March was just above a 33-year low.
As well, the 12-month change in the average hourly earnings of permanent workers reported by Statistics Canada in the Labour Force Survey (considered a good indicator of the underlying change in wages) picked up markedly after mid-2007.
However, data on hourly labour compensation from the Productivity Accounts and the percentage of firms reporting labour shortages in the Bank's spring survey do indicate some easing in labour market pressures.
After reviewing the indicators of capacity pressures, the Governing Council judges that, overall, the economy was operating just above its production capacity in the first quarter of 2008, and it is expected to move into modest excess supply in the second quarter.
Concerns about rising global inflation have become more evident in recent months, reflecting the impact of higher commodity prices, especially food and energy prices, combined with increased pressures on production capacity in several countries after a period of strong global growth.
In Canada, these pressures have been muted to a significant extent by price-level adjustments associated with the high value of the Canadian dollar.
Total CPI inflation averaged 1.8 per cent in the first quarter of 2008, down from 2.4 per cent in the last quarter of 2007.
After averaging just above 2 per cent in the period between September 2006 and August 2007, the core rate of inflation has moved down and averaged 1.4 per cent in February and March 2008.
A significant part of this reduction appears to reflect greater competitive pressures following the rise of the Canadian dollar to near parity with the US dollar, which led to a downward level adjustment in the prices of some goods, particularly automobiles.
Additionally, the rate of change in core food prices has eased markedly, owing to such factors as increased competition in the retail food sector.
At the same time, the 12-month rate of increase in the prices of core services has remained quite high, owing to the continued strength in domestic demand.
Other measures of the trend rate of inflation that the Bank monitors, when adjusted to exclude the effect of changes in indirect taxes, were somewhat higher than the core inflation rate in the first quarter of 2008.
Given that the recent weakening in core inflation appears to be largely the result of one-time price-level adjustments and after considering alternative measures as well, the Governing Council judges that the underlying trend in inflation was about 2 per cent in the first quarter.
The four-quarter change in the chain price index for GDP (a broad price measure of the goods and services produced in Canada) edged up from 3.4 per cent in the second quarter of 2007 to 3.9 per cent in the fourth quarter, reflecting greater improvements in Canada's terms of trade.
The mean private sector forecast for total CPI inflation in 2009 is 2 per cent, and about 80 per cent of firms in the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey expected CPI inflation to be within a range of 1 to 3 per cent over the next two years.
Consensus forecasts of inflation over the longer term also remained very close to 2 per cent.
Strains in the global financial system have broadened and become more severe in recent months.
Estimates of losses from exposure to US mortgage and structured credits have increased, and problems in these markets have spread to other credit markets.
Yield spreads between corporate and government bonds have widened significantly and debt issuance in several key fixed income markets has been constrained.
These difficulties have been heightened by a lack of liquidity, a widespread process of deleveraging by financial institutions, and the deteriorating outlook for the US economy.
Widespread uncertainty about the distribution of credit losses among financial institutions has continued to feed concerns over counterparty risk and has contributed to higher borrowing spreads in term money markets.
In March, amid renewed signs of pressure in term money markets, central banks again intervened in a coordinated effort to support the financial system through the introduction of a number of additional measures to address the liquidity needs of financial institutions.
Steps taken recently by several large international banks to improve disclosure of potential losses and to strengthen their balance sheets have also led to some lessening of uncertainty about counterparty risk.
The US Federal Reserve has lowered its target for the federal funds rate by 300 basis points since September 2007 in response to the slowing in the US economy and the increased cost and reduced availability of credit to businesses and households.
Short-term rates in the United States embody expectations of a further reduction in the federal funds rate over the course of the year.
The Bank of England has also lowered its policy interest rate.
In contrast, the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan have not changed their respective policy rates since the beginning of the financial turmoil.
Policy rates in Canada have been lowered by 150 basis points since December.
Market expectations are for a further 25-basis point reduction in the overnight rate by the end of the year.
The turmoil in global financial markets has led to tighter credit conditions in Canada, but strains in Canadian credit markets have been somewhat less intense than those in the United States.
Canadian financial institutions, businesses, and households have healthier balance sheets.
Canadian banks are less exposed to the subprime-mortgage market than their US counterparts.
Furthermore, Canadian banks are less dependent on securitization for their financing and on capital markets for their revenues.
Thus far, their losses have been limited, and their exposure to structured products backed by subprime mortgages quite manageable.
Nonetheless, from the beginning of the financial market turbulence last summer until 21 April, the average spreads for the different types of market financing for banks increased by about 75 basis points relative to the overnight rate.
The tightening in credit conditions is most evident in the spreads paid by banks to issue bonds and senior deposit notes.
Banks have shown a willingness to borrow at these higher spreads in order to secure longer-term financing, but have not yet fully passed these increased spreads on to businesses and households.
Nevertheless, the absolute cost of borrowing by banks has declined, given that the overnight rate was reduced by 100 basis points over the period.
The spread between the cost of borrowing for non-financial businesses and the overnight rate as of 21 April has risen by about 50 basis points since the middle of 2007.
This widening has been more than offset by reductions in the overnight rate.
Debt issuance by non-financial corporations remains difficult, and new debt issues are generally being priced at rates higher than indicative rates in secondary markets.
On the whole, the growth of business credit has remained elevated in the first quarter of 2008.
This partly reflects a substitution away from market financing towards bank financing in the current turbulent environment.
The spread between the costs of borrowing by households and the overnight rate has also remained elevated and, as of 21 April, is estimated to be around 50 basis points higher than it was last summer.
But the terms and conditions of household credit have not tightened to any extent, and the cost of borrowing is lower, given the declines in the overnight interest rate.
Growth in household borrowing remains strong despite some deceleration thus far in 2008.
Continued vigorous demand for credit by households is associated with robust growth in employment, sustained wage increases, increases in home equity, and decreases in the effective cost of borrowing.
Since the January Update, the Canadian dollar has averaged 100 cents US but more recently has been trading in a range of roughly 97 to 100 cents US.
High prices for energy and metals continue to support the currency.
While the actual policy interest rate spread between Canada and the United States has widened since January, the spread expected by the third quarter of 2008 has narrowed, leading to some modest downward pressure on the currency.
The trade-weighted CERI-ex US has declined by about 4.2 per cent since the Update, reflecting the strength of both the euro and the Japanese yen, as well as concern about the negative effects of the US economic slowdown on the Canadian economy.
The outlook for the Canadian economy through to the end of 2010 has been revised down from that in the January Update to reflect the effects of the weaker US and global economies, and the tightening of credit conditions resulting from continuing strains in financial markets.
First, the Canada/US exchange rate is assumed to average 98 cents US, within the recent trading range.
Third, the tighter global credit conditions are assumed to persist until 2009.
Fourth, potential output growth is assumed to be 2.8 per cent in 2008, 2.7 per cent in 2009, and 2.6 per cent in 2010.
Global economic growth is expected to slow considerably in 2008 and 2009 as a result of a deepening of the US economic slowdown and its spillover to other economies, particularly those of the other major industrialized countries.
In 2010, the global economy is projected to grow more strongly, as the turbulence in credit markets subsides, housing markets in the United States and Europe stabilize, and economies begin to rebuild domestic demand and reduce excess supply.
The Bank now expects US GDP to decline marginally in the first half of 2008 before growth picks up gradually through 2009.
Domestic demand in the United States is projected to remain subdued over the coming year as a result of declines in employment, sharp increases in gasoline prices, weaker consumer confidence, further weakening in the housing sector and tightening in credit conditions.
Increased borrowing spreads, reductions in the availability of credit, and tighter terms and conditions are assumed to persist through 2008 and gradually dissipate through 2009.
In 2010, as the housing market stabilizes, heightened risk aversion dissipates, and financial institutions improve their capital positions, credit conditions are assumed to be back to more normal levels.
Several factors are helping to mitigate the weakness in the US economy in 2008, and will contribute to the recovery through 2009 and 2010.
First, monetary policy has eased considerably in recent months, which will provide some support for domestic demand.
Second, the cumulative effect of the depreciation of the real effective US exchange rate, coupled with solid economic growth in the rest of the world, will help to underpin export growth.
Third, easing in credit conditions and the gradual elimination of excess housing supply will support a resumption of economic growth in the latter part of the projection period.
The US government's fiscal stimulus package is expected to temporarily boost economic growth in mid-2008.
Growth in China and in the newly industrialized Asian economies is projected to remain strong but to moderate over the projection horizon, as demand from the United States and other industrialized countries weakens, and tighter monetary policies are introduced to curb mounting inflationary pressures.
Prices for non-energy commodities are higher in the near term than projected in the last Update, but are expected to ease by about 15 per cent between now and the end of 2010.
Supplies of these commodities should gradually adjust as new production capacity comes online and reductions arising from weather-related factors unwind.
Futures prices for crude oil are also higher than those in the January Update.
Based on futures prices as of the 10 days ending 18 April, prices for crude oil should ease by about 10 per cent from their current level of just over US$112 per barrel to around US$102 per barrel in 2010.
Futures prices for natural gas are also somewhat higher than in the January Update.
The outlook for the Canadian economy has been directly affected by the downward revision to the economic outlook in the United States and by the continuing strains in credit markets as institutions deleverage and risk is repriced.
While credit conditions for households and firms have tightened, lending rates do not yet fully reflect the higher funding spreads for banks.
It is assumed that these higher spreads will be passed on and that tighter credit conditions will persist through 2008.
Credit spreads are then assumed to narrow gradually over the course of 2009 and to stabilize in 2010 at 25 basis points higher than their levels prior to the turmoil.
On an average annual basis, the economy is projected to expand by 1.4 per cent in 2008, 2.4 per cent in 2009, and 3.3 per cent in 2010.
The slowdown in Canadian activity in 2008 results mainly from further declines in exports in the first half of the year, owing to weak US demand and the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
Although growth in exports is expected to resume in the second half of this year, solid advances are not expected before 2010, given the gradual recovery of demand in the United States.
With growth in imports expected to remain strong, net exports exert a larger drag on overall growth in 2008 than was the case in the last Update.
Growth in final domestic demand is expected to provide important support to economic expansion.
The growth of consumer spending should remain strong in the first half of 2008, before easing a little over the remainder of the projection period.
These solid gains are supported by continued growth in real disposable income and household net worth, as well as the stimulus provided by monetary policy, although reduced US growth will dampen consumption growth in Canada slightly through its effects on real income, net worth, and confidence.
Housing investment is projected to decline slightly over the projection period from the very high level reached last year.
The tightening of credit conditions in Canada is also expected to have a slight moderating effect on the growth of household spending, which should largely dissipate by 2010.
The growth of business investment should ease during the projection period from the strong pace registered in 2007, owing to the effects of slowing global economic growth, the tightening of credit conditions, and increased uncertainty resulting from the financial market turbulence.
Overall, gains in capital spending will, nevertheless, stay quite robust, given the projects that have already started, the still high levels of commodity prices, strong profits and solid balance sheets, and ongoing reductions in the prices of imported machinery and equipment.
Weaker near-term growth causes the Canadian economy to move into a position of excess supply in the second quarter of 2008, and spare production capacity continues to increase through early 2009.
Owing largely to the recent price-level adjustments for automobiles, the core rate of inflation is projected to remain at about 1.3 per cent through the third quarter of 2008.
With the effect of the price-level adjustments falling out of the year-over-year calculation in the fourth quarter of 2008, the core rate moves up to about 1.7 per cent.
Excess supply in the economy acts to keep the core rate below 2 per cent through 2009.
As the amount of excess supply diminishes, and with the continuing upward pressure from higher labour and energy costs, core inflation subsequently rises to 2 per cent in 2010, a little later than in the last Update.
The outlook for the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI reflects the revised projection for core inflation, assumptions for energy prices based on current futures prices, and the impact of past changes in indirect taxes.
Total CPI inflation in 2008 is projected to be higher than in the last Update, owing to the effect of higher futures prices for crude oil.
Excluding the impact of the recent changes in indirect taxes, total CPI inflation is projected to average just under 2.5 per cent through the remainder of 2008 and then move slightly below 2 per cent in early 2009, before returning to the target in 2010.
There are a number of risks around the Bank's base-case projection for inflation in Canada.
The risks around the US and global economic projections are considered to be balanced.
On the upside, stronger domestic demand than assumed in the base-case projection, driven by solid wage gains in a tight labour market and continued improvements in the terms of trade, could lead to higher inflation.
Given the persistent weakness in Canada's labour productivity growth, potential output growth could also be lower than assumed and could intensify the upward pressure on inflation.
Furthermore, if demand for commodities from emerging markets remains robust and the ability of producers to increase global supplies is constrained, upward pressure on many commodity prices may intensify.
Global inflationary pressures also pose an upside risk.
They could spill over to Canada and lead to higher-than-projected inflation through increased costs for imports.
On the downside, weakness in the United States and other industrialized countries may result in greater downward pressure on commodity prices than assumed in the base case.
This would have the effect of slowing the rate of increase in real incomes and domestic demand in Canada, putting downward pressure on inflation.
There is also the risk that market funding for Canadian banks and firms could be more difficult than assumed, which could further increase the cost and restrict the availability of credit for business investment and consumption.
As well, there is the risk of greater direct downward pressure on core goods prices related to the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
The increased competitive pressures, which have been seen most importantly in the prices of automobiles, could spread to other sectors.
Three major developments are affecting the Canadian economy: the protracted weakness in the US economy; ongoing turbulence in global financial markets; and sharp increases in the prices of certain commodities - particularly energy.
The first two developments are evolving roughly in line with expectations outlined in the April Monetary Policy Report.
However, many commodity prices continue to outstrip earlier expectations, and this has altered the outlook for global and domestic inflation.
Although global economic growth is slowing, the momentum in the first half of the year has been stronger than earlier expected.
Growth is becoming increasingly weighted towards emerging-market economies.
This has contributed to rising demand for commodities in an environment where the supply response for many commodities has been muted and inventories are low.
The resulting price increases have led not only to higher global inflation but also to continued improvements in Canada's terms of trade and increases in real national income.
Economic growth in Canada in the first quarter of 2008 was weaker than expected, mainly reflecting a sharp decline in inventory accumulation.
However, final domestic demand continues to expand at a solid pace.
Strong income gains from high commodity prices and high levels of employment, as well as an expected improvement in financial conditions, should support the growth of domestic demand through 2009 and 2010.
The drag from net exports diminishes over the projection horizon as the US economy recovers and the effects of the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar dissipate.
The Canadian economy is judged to have moved into slight excess supply in the second quarter of 2008; excess supply is expected to increase through the balance of the year.
High terms of trade, accommodative monetary policy, and a gradual recovery in the US economy are expected to generate above-potential economic growth starting in the first half of 2009, bringing the economy back to full capacity around mid-2010.
Total CPI inflation over the next year is expected to be much higher than projected at the time of the April Report.
Assuming energy prices follow current futures prices, total CPI inflation is projected to rise temporarily above 4 per cent, peaking in the first quarter of 2009.
As energy prices stabilize and with medium-term inflation expectations remaining well anchored, total inflation is then projected to converge to the core rate of inflation at the 2 per cent target in the second half of 2009.
Core inflation is projected to remain well contained and broadly in line with earlier expectations, averaging close to 1.5 per cent through the third quarter of this year and rising to 2 per cent in the second half of 2009.
The three major developments affecting the Canadian economy pose significant upside and downside risks to the base-case projection.
Weighing the implications of these developments, the Bank views the risks to its base-case projection for inflation as balanced.
Against this backdrop, the Bank of Canada kept its key policy rate unchanged at 3 per cent on 10 June and on 15 July, and judges that the current level of the target for the overnight rate remains appropriate.
The Bank will continue to monitor carefully the evolution of risks, together with economic and financial developments in the Canadian and global economies, and set monetary policy consistent with achieving the inflation target over the medium term.
Global economic growth, while slowing, appears to have been stronger in the first half of 2008 than expected at the time of the April Report.
Global inflation has risen significantly, reflecting sharp increases in energy and food prices.
The main factor behind the recent surge in world energy and food prices appears to be the strong trend growth in many emerging-market economies and the resulting rise in their demand for commodities.
Overly accommodative monetary policies have fed domestic demand and further exacerbated inflationary pressures in several emerging Asian economies.
Limited growth in world oil supplies has also been a factor in pushing crude oil prices to record levels.
The US economy grew at a modest pace in the first half of 2008, owing to further sharp declines in residential investment and weak household spending on durable goods, especially automobiles.
However, consumption was somewhat more resilient than expected, supported by the early arrival of fiscal rebate cheques.
Overall, the combined effect of a large overhang in the supply of housing, rising energy prices, declining employment, and continuing disruptions in financial markets has weighed heavily on US domestic demand.
Net exports remained the main source of strength in the US economy.
While GDP growth in both Europe and Japan was stronger than anticipated in the first quarter of 2008, reflecting temporary factors, recent data indicate that growth in the second quarter will likely be weaker owing to spillover effects from the US slowdown and ongoing unsettled conditions in global financial markets.
In Canada, real GDP growth was weaker than expected in the first quarter, with the economy contracting at an annual rate of 0.3 per cent, compared with the 1.0 per cent growth that had been projected in the April Report.
In contrast, real gross domestic income increased at an annual rate of 2.4 per cent in the quarter, owing to a further 8.1 per cent (at an annual rate) improvement in Canada's terms of trade.
On a year-over-year basis, this real income measure is up nearly 4 per cent as a result of the significant rise in the prices of many commodities that Canada produces.
The growth of household spending in Canada, nevertheless, fell short of expectations in the first quarter, and the decrease in inventory investment was considerably larger than expected.
Net exports made a surprising positive contribution to GDP growth in the first quarter, as the decline in exports was more than offset by a significant contraction in imports.
Spending on imported goods and services, which had surged in the last half of 2007, in line with the sharp appreciation of the Canadian dollar, fell back significantly.
The contraction in merchandise imports was related to the large negative inventory swing.
Exports decreased for a third consecutive quarter as a result of declining US spending on housing and automobiles, and the effects of the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
Available data for the second quarter of 2008 suggest that annualized real GDP growth was about 0.8 per cent.
The growth of final domestic demand likely remained solid, while net exports exerted a dampening effect.
However, inventory investment is not expected to have been the major drag on growth that it was in the first quarter.
After three quarters of below-trend growth, the Canadian economy is judged to have moved into excess supply in the second quarter of 2008.
The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap suggests that the economy is currently operating about 0.2 per cent below its production potential, although respondents to the Business Outlook Survey still reported some pressures on capacity, particularly in Western Canada.
Total CPI inflation has been higher than expected in the April Report, reflecting the impact of higher prices for crude oil on gasoline prices, as well as a marginally higher core rate of inflation.
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI rose from 1.4 per cent in March to 2.2 per cent in May (or from 1.9 to 2.8 per cent, respectively, if the effect of changes in indirect taxes is excluded).
The core rate of inflation averaged 1.5 per cent in April and May, up from a low of 1.3 per cent in March.
The downward pressure exerted on certain goods prices (especially automobile prices), as a result of the rise in the Canadian dollar to near parity with the US dollar, continued to hold the core rate down.
The Bank closely monitors a number of indicators of inflation expectations.
The measure of near-term inflation expectations reported in the Bank's latest Business Outlook Survey increased sharply, with about one-third of firms expecting CPI inflation to be above 3 per cent over the next two years.
However, this measure is highly influenced by swings in energy prices and tends to reverse as total CPI inflation falls in response to stabilizing or declining energy prices.
The mean private sector forecast for total CPI inflation in 2009 remains at 2 per cent, and Consensus Economics' forecasts of inflation for two years and beyond have also stayed close to 2 per cent.
Inflation expectations, as measured by the spread between 30-year conventional and Real Return bonds, have increased in recent months, although they remain well within the range experienced over the past several years.
Liquidity and technical factors suggest that this measure should be interpreted with caution.
Considering all measures, the Bank judges that expectations of inflation over the policy horizon remain well anchored to the 2 per cent inflation target.
Conditions in global financial markets continue to be unsettled.
Volatility in bond and equity markets has remained high since the April Report, and credit spreads on corporate debt, particularly for financial institutions, have widened.
In the United States and Europe, spreads on short-term bank funding remain well above historical averages.
At the same time, the issuance of corporate debt has improved, and financial institutions have made progress with regard to disclosing their balance sheet exposures and strengthening their capital positions.
Nonetheless, the ongoing reintermediation of assets onto bank balance sheets and the deleveraging of the financial system are expected to weigh on global credit markets for some time.
Although credit conditions in Canada remain challenging, they are better in many respects than those in other major markets.
For example, short-term credit spreads, as measured by the spread between short-term lending rates and the expected overnight rate, have narrowed significantly in recent months.
Reflecting these improved conditions, the Bank of Canada was the first G-7 central bank to withdraw the provision of extraordinary liquidity.
While the average effective borrowing spreads faced by banks, nonfinancial businesses, and households have increased by about 75 basis points vis--vis the overnight rate since the onset of turbulence in financial markets last summer, this increase has been more than offset by the cumulative 150-basis-point reduction in the target overnight rate.
As a result, the effective borrowing costs faced by banks, businesses, and households are estimated to have fallen by about 75 basis points over the past year.
Growth in business credit has slowed in recent quarters, reflecting the recent contraction in economic activity and generally challenging credit market conditions.
Non-price related terms and conditions for bank intermediated credit have tightened over the past year.
In contrast, growth in household credit remains robust.
This likely reflects high employment and increases in wealth and real income.
While banks appear to have fully passed on their increased borrowing costs to households, they do not appear to have tightened non-price conditions.
Nonetheless, the continued strength in household credit growth is somewhat surprising, given the moderation of activity in the housing market and the reported decline in consumer confidence.
The growth of household credit is expected to moderate in the coming months.
Financial market expectations, as reflected in asset prices, suggest that policy rates in all the major economies will remain unchanged or increase modestly by year-end.
For Canada, current levels of short-term interest rates incorporate no change in the target overnight rate by year-end.
The Canadian dollar remains at about the same level as at the time of the April Report, having traded in a range of roughly 97.5 to 101.5 cents US.
While stronger commodity prices are generally supportive of the Canadian dollar, concerns about the outlook for the US economy and US demand for Canadian goods and services appear to have weighed on the currency.
The Bank's base-case projection incorporates the following key assumptions: a Canada/US exchange rate averaging 98 cents US; energy prices evolving in line with current futures prices; prices for non-energy commodities decreasing by about 15 per cent over the projection horizon; tight global credit conditions persisting through 2008, before gradually improving in 2009; and an orderly resolution of global imbalances.
Potential output growth in Canada is also assumed to be the same as in the April Report (that is, 2.8 per cent in the second half of 2008 and declining by 0.1 percentage point per year in 2009 and 2010).
In the base-case projection, global economic growth slows in the second half of 2008 and in 2009, owing to weakness in the US economy, ongoing financial market turbulence, sharply higher commodity prices, and more restrictive monetary policy in a number of overseas economies.
With inflation at uncomfortably high levels in emerging markets, growth should be dampened by tighter monetary conditions - as monetary authorities raise policy rates and reserve requirements, and real exchange rates appreciate.
The outlook for the US economy is similar to that in the April Report.
However, the average annual growth rates for 2008 and 2009 differ because of a stronger starting point in the first half of 2008 and weaker growth through the rest of the year.
The stronger first half reflects the boost to retail sales coming from the early arrival of the temporary fiscal stimulus.
Going forward, continuing turbulence in financial markets, the ongoing correction in the housing market, and significantly higher energy prices lead to weaker consumption and investment.
Purchases of durables, especially automobiles, are expected to be most affected.
Growth in the economy begins to recover in 2009, led by net exports and firming domestic demand growth, as credit conditions improve, the housing market stabilizes, and the effect of past monetary policy easing gathers strength.
Annual US growth is now expected to average 1.6 per cent in 2008, 1.5 per cent in 2009, and 3.3 per cent in 2010.
Core inflation is expected to be about 2.0 per cent throughout the projection horizon.
Against this global backdrop and with the inventory adjustment completed, real GDP growth in Canada is projected to pick up in the second half of 2008, and to rise above 3.0 per cent from mid-2009 to the end of 2010.
Compared with the April Report, average annual growth is projected to be slightly lower this year, owing to the weakness in the first quarter, while projected growth for 2009 and 2010 is essentially unchanged.
Final domestic demand is projected to be the key driver of economic growth in Canada over the projection horizon.
Recent increases in global commodity prices lead to higher wages and salaries, higher government revenues, higher corporate profits and equity valuations, and stronger investment growth, particularly in the energy sector.
Net exports exert a significant drag on growth through the rest of 2008, but this drag diminishes through 2009 and 2010 as the US economy gradually recovers.
Given this growth profile, excess supply in the Canadian economy is projected to increase further through late 2008, but to gradually dissipate with the acceleration in aggregate demand.
The economy is thus projected to return to balance around mid-2010.
Total CPI inflation for the remainder of 2008 is expected to be sharply higher than projected in the last Report, chiefly because of much higher prices for crude oil.
With the price of crude oil assumed to stabilize near its current level, core inflation well contained, and inflation expectations well anchored, the 12-month change in the total CPI is expected to converge to the core rate in the second half of 2009 at the 2 per cent target.
The core rate of inflation is projected to remain at about 1.5 per cent through the third quarter of 2008.
With the earlier price-level adjustments of automobiles starting to fall out of the year-over-year calculation, the core rate should increase to 1.8 per cent in the fourth quarter of this year.
Downward pressure on core inflation from excess supply is expected to keep the core rate of inflation below 2.0 per cent through the first half of 2009 as the deceleration in the growth of housing prices largely offsets the expected acceleration of food prices.
With the amount of excess supply diminishing and with some upward pressure from increases in labour and energy costs, the core rate is expected to move up to 2.0 per cent in the second half of 2009 and stay there over the projection horizon.
In this base-case projection, the momentum in domestic demand arising from improvements in the terms of trade, the normalization of credit conditions through 2009, and the gradual recovery of the US economy, act to bring the economy back to potential around mid-2010.
The three major developments affecting the Canadian economy pose significant upside and downside risks to the Bank's base-case projection.
On the upside, domestic demand could be greater than projected, given the strength in Canada's terms of trade and the momentum of household credit growth.
In addition, potential output growth could be lower than assumed, given the ongoing weakness in labour productivity associated in part with the reallocation of resources across sectors.
Global inflationary pressures could also lead to higher-than-projected import costs for Canada.
On the downside, commodity prices could be weaker than assumed.
Growth in the United States could also be weaker than expected, particularly in those sectors that are most relevant for Canadian exports.
In addition, continued strains in global financial markets could have a greater-than-projected impact on global growth and on the cost and availability of credit in Canada.
Weighing the implication of these considerations, the Bank views the risks to its base-case projection for inflation as balanced.
Three major interrelated global developments are having a profound impact on the Canadian economy and making the outlook more uncertain than it was at the time of the July Monetary Policy Report Update.
The associated need for the global banking sector to continue to reduce leverage will restrain growth for some time.
Second, there is growing evidence that the global economy is heading into a mild recession, led by a US economy that is already in recession and expected to pick up only modestly through 2009.
Third, there have been sharp declines in the prices of many commodities since the July Update.
These developments have reduced inflationary pressures globally.
In response to the global financial crisis, policy-makers in major economies have taken several extraordinary actions to provide liquidity to markets, recapitalize their banking sectors, and restore credit flows.
In line with the G7 Plan of Action, these initiatives have reduced the risk of a significantly worse outcome for the global financial system, and Canada's economy and strong financial system will benefit directly.
Nonetheless, the deleveraging of the global financial system will take some time to complete, and will involve a larger and more persistent tightening of credit conditions than was assumed in July.
Given these developments, the projection for the Canadian economy has been revised down considerably for 2008 and 2009.
However, uncertainty around the Bank's base-case projection for growth and inflation in Canada is much greater than normal, given the unsettled conditions in global financial markets and the rapid deceleration of global growth.
Lower commodity prices will also dampen the outlook, working through a deterioration in Canada's terms of trade to moderate domestic demand growth.
The marked tightening in Canadian credit conditions in recent weeks will restrain business and housing investment.
As a result, economic activity in Canada is projected to remain sluggish through the first quarter of next year, then to pick up over the rest of 2009 and to accelerate to above-potential growth in 2010, supported by improving credit conditions, the lagged effects of monetary policy actions, and stronger global growth.
The recent sizeable depreciation of the Canadian dollar will also provide an important offset to the effects of weaker global demand and lower commodity prices.
Overall, the Bank projects average annual growth in real GDP of 0.6 per cent in 2008 and 2009, rising to 3.4 per cent in 2010.
The growth of potential output has been slower than previously anticipated, owing to anemic productivity growth that has been only partially offset by a larger-than-expected increase in the supply of labour.
The Bank has lowered its estimate for the growth of potential output to 2.3 per cent in 2008, and assumes a gradual rise to 2.5 per cent by 2010.
The Canadian economy is judged to have moved into slight excess supply in the third quarter of 2008.
This excess supply is expected to build through to the end of 2009, and is not projected to be fully eliminated until the start of 2011.
With growing slack in the economy, and a lower assumed path for commodity prices, inflation pressures in Canada are projected to ease significantly relative to the July Update.
Core inflation is projected to remain below 2 per cent until the end of 2010.
Assuming oil prices in a range of US$81 to US$88 per barrel, consistent with recent futures prices, total CPI inflation should peak in the third quarter of 2008, and is projected to fall below 1 per cent in mid-2009 before returning to the 2 per cent target by the end of 2010.
In light of diminished inflationary pressures, the Bank of Canada lowered its policy interest rate by 50 basis points on 8 October, acting in concert with other major central banks.
This extraordinary action, together with a 25-basis-point reduction on 21 October, brings the cumulative reduction in the target for the overnight rate to 75 basis points since the Bank's last fixed announcement date.
These actions provide timely and significant support to the Canadian economy.
The cumulative reduction in the Bank's policy rate since the beginning of December 2007 is now 225 basis points.
In line with the new outlook, some further monetary stimulus will likely be required to achieve the 2 per cent inflation target over the medium term.
The Bank judges that the risks are roughly balanced around its revised base-case projection for inflation in Canada - a base case that now incorporates the recent intensification of the global financial crisis, a mild global recession, and the measures that have been taken to resolve the crisis.
The evolution of the financial crisis, its impact on the global economy, and the timing of the effect of the various extraordinary measures being taken to address it pose significant risks to the inflation projection on both the upside and the downside.
The global economy is entering a mild recession.
This is largely due to ongoing dislocations in global financial markets that resulted in tighter credit conditions and to the surge in world commodity prices in the first half of 2008.
The slowdown originated in the United States, where problems in the US subprime-mortgage market and falling house prices have spread more broadly to consumption and investment.
Economic growth is currently decelerating in Europe and Japan and, to a lesser extent, in emerging-market economies, as the impact of tightening global credit conditions on economic activity and the associated negative feedback loop take hold.
Until recently, inflation had been rising in many countries, particularly in emerging-market economies where food is a major component of the consumer basket.
In view of the recent sharp decline in world prices for energy and food, global consumer inflation likely peaked during the third quarter.
Although US economic growth in the second quarter of 2008 was stronger than anticipated owing to the earlier-than-expected impact of the US government's fiscal-stimulus package, activity now appears to be slowing much faster than expected.
The ongoing sharp correction in the housing sector continues to exert a significant drag on growth as the inventory glut, the reduced availability of mortgage credit, and tighter lending standards continue to depress residential investment.
Household consumption has also been weak because of tighter credit conditions, falling housing and equity prices, declining employment, and high prices for energy and food.
Recent indicators point to a stalling of real GDP growth in Japan and Europe in the second half of 2008.
High world oil prices through much of 2007 and 2008 have also depressed household and business spending.
In Europe, the weakness in domestic demand has been exacerbated by tighter credit conditions and corrections in some housing markets.
Growth in newly industrialized and emerging-market economies has also moderated, mainly reflecting less-buoyant external demand.
Nevertheless, solid domestic demand has supported overall growth in these countries, since they have so far been less directly affected by the global financial turmoil.
High prices for commodities in the first half of 2008 dampened domestic demand in commodity-importing countries, but boosted revenues and stimulated domestic demand in commodity-exporting countries.
Commodity prices have declined considerably since the July Update, especially for energy, largely owing to reduced demand and weaker prospects for global economic growth.
Energy prices have been particularly volatile, and are still relatively high by historical standards.
The price of light crude oil (West Texas Intermediate), which was about US$140 per barrel at the time of the July Update, averaged US$81 in the ten days ending on 17 October 2008.
Natural gas prices have also moved down markedly, reflecting both increased supplies and reduced demand as a result of relatively moderate summer temperatures in many parts of North America.
Declines in the prices of grains and oilseeds have been attributed to the effect of favourable weather conditions on crop yields.
Economic growth in Canada has slowed abruptly this year, following a period of exceptionally rapid growth in the second half of 2007.
Export volumes fell, and growth in final domestic demand decelerated noticeably.
The substantial rise in Canada's terms of trade and the associated gains in real gross domestic income continued to support domestic demand.
However, increased uncertainty related to the deterioration in the global economic outlook, together with some tightening in credit conditions, has dampened household and business expenditures.
In addition, spending related to pent-up demand for housing and some durable consumer goods appears to have been largely completed by the end of 2007.
The result was a net decline in the level of GDP over the first half of 2008.
Available data for the third quarter of 2008 suggest that real GDP growth (at an annual rate) was about 0.8 per cent.
The rate of growth of final domestic demand, especially consumer spending, is likely to have decelerated further as a result of slower growth in real income and heightened uncertainty related to the financial market crisis and the deteriorating outlook for the US economy.
The risk of lower growth in potential output that was identified in previous Reports has materialized.
Potential output grew more slowly in the first half of 2008 than estimated in previous Reports and Updates, and growth over the near term will likely be lower than previously assumed as well.
This weakness on the supply side of the economy can be attributed to the low growth of labour productivity.
Labour productivity in the business sector actually fell by 1.3 per cent from the second quarter of 2007 to the second quarter of 2008.
Trend labour productivity growth (based on the Bank's conventional measure) has recently been close to 1.0 per cent, compared with the assumption of 1.5 per cent used in the Bank's previous projections.
While the slowdown in real GDP growth undoubtedly played a role in this weak performance, recent declines in productivity have been most evident in sectors experiencing pronounced labour shortages, such as mining, oil and gas extraction, and construction, which had to draw on less-skilled workers.
These have also been among the sectors most affected by the trend rise in global commodity prices in recent years.
The lower-than-expected growth of trend labour productivity has been only partly offset by higher-than-expected increases in trend labour inputs.
After carefully reviewing the outlook for productivity and labour inputs, the Bank is now estimating potential output of 2.3 per cent in 2008, and assuming lower trend growth in potential output of 2.4 per cent in 2009 and 2.5 per cent in 2010 and 2011.
Several measures still point to a modest degree of pressure on production capacity in the third quarter of 2008.
In the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey, respondents continued to report some strains on capacity, especially in Western Canada.
The employment-to-population ratio in the third quarter was down only a little from the record highs reached in February and March, while the unemployment rate was slightly above the 33-year low recorded in October 2007 and in January and February of this year.
Other indicators suggest that the Canadian economy had moved into modest excess supply in the third quarter of 2008.
The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap indicates that the economy was operating about 0.6 per cent below its production potential in the third quarter of 2008.
The percentage of firms reporting labour shortages in the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey was somewhat below average.
Finally, the 12-month change in the average hourly earnings of permanent workers reported by Statistics Canada in the Labour Force Survey has eased since the beginning of the year.
After reviewing the indicators of capacity pressures, the Governing Council judges that the economy was operating close to its production capacity in the second quarter of 2008 and moved into slight excess supply in the third quarter.
Total CPI inflation in Canada moved up from 2.2 per cent in May to 3.5 per cent in August, slightly less than projected in the July Update.
The increase in total CPI inflation mainly reflects the impact of higher prices for crude oil over the past year, and, to a lesser extent, the effect of higher food prices.
If the effect of changes in indirect taxes is excluded, the rate of increase in the total CPI in August was 4.0 per cent.
After averaging 1.5 per cent since last April, the core rate of inflation edged up to 1.7 per cent in August.
The acceleration of food prices was only partly offset by the effect of the deceleration in house prices.
With the economy having operated above full capacity for some time, the 12-month rate of increase in the prices of core services other than shelter has remained at an elevated level.
CPIW, an alternative measure of the trend rate of inflation (adjusted to exclude the effect of changes in indirect taxes), was much higher than the core rate in August, largely because of the substantial increases in selected consumer prices for energy.
Since energy prices have already declined, this measure likely overstates the underlying trend in inflation.
The Bank regularly reviews a number of indicators of inflation expectations.
While most measures of near-term inflation expectations have stayed fairly high, consistent with the short-term outlook for total inflation, longer-term measures are well anchored to the 2 per cent inflation target.
The measure of near-term inflation expectations reported in the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey stayed quite high, with about one-third of firms expecting CPI inflation to be above 3 per cent over the next two years.
Consensus Economics' forecast for total CPI inflation in 2009 was 2.1 per cent, and their forecasts of inflation over the longer term have remained close to 2 per cent.
Inflation expectations, as measured by the spread between 30-year conventional and Real Return bonds, have moved below 2 per cent in recent weeks.
The global financial turmoil that began in the late summer of 2007 has worsened in the past two months to become the deepest, broadest, and most persistent financial crisis in decades.
Failures or near-failures of several large financial institutions in the United States and Europe intensified these financial strains, and uncertainty over the magnitude of additional credit-related losses increased.
Credit spreads reached unprecedented levels, and risk aversion has risen abruptly.
The combination of deleveraging and falling asset prices has resulted in extremely volatile and difficult financial conditions.
Liquidity in financial markets contracted sharply, as financial institutions became increasingly reluctant to lend to each other.
The growing difficulty of raising capital and credit, the increased cost of borrowing, and the related effects on confidence are contributing importantly to the slowdown in the global economy.
In response to the intensification of the financial crisis, governments and central banks have taken a series of unprecedented initiatives to stabilize the financial system and limit further negative feedback into the real economy.
Recent global initiatives to improve the functioning of financial markets have included the provision of significant additional overnight and term liquidity, capital injections for financial institutions, guarantees of bank deposits and borrowing, and purchases of bad assets.
These measures are aimed at reactivating the intermediation process by supporting an orderly deleveraging of the financial system, strengthening the capital position of financial institutions, and protecting the interests of depositors and other creditors.
The G7 Plan of Action, announced on 10 October, provided the foundation for urgent and unprecedented measures in the euro area, the United Kingdom, and the United States to stabilize financial markets and restore the flow of credit.
Over the past month, the Bank of Canada has undertaken a series of operations to reinforce the target for the overnight rate and support market liquidity at longer terms.
To strengthen the impact of its term operations, the Bank has significantly increased the size and frequency of such operations and broadened the lists of acceptable collateral and eligible counterparties.
In coordination with other central banks, the Bank of Canada established a US$30 billion swap facility with the US Federal Reserve in September as a precautionary measure to provide US-dollar liquidity in Canada should it be required.
The Bank will provide exceptional liquidity to the Canadian financial system as long as conditions warrant.
Taken together, these measures strengthen the effectiveness of the monetary policy transmission process in these difficult market circumstances.
Reflecting the rapidly changing outlook for growth and inflation, central banks from a number of industrialized countries took concerted monetary policy action to cut policy rates on 8 October 2008.
As part of this initiative, the US Federal Reserve lowered the target for its federal funds rate by 50 basis points to 1.50 per cent, bringing the amount of the reduction since the beginning of the credit-market turmoil in August 2007 to 375 basis points.
Included in this concerted action was a 50-basis-point reduction in policy rates announced by both the European Central Bank and the Bank of England.
In Canada, the 50-basis-point cut on 8 October as part of the concerted action and a further 25-basis-point reduction on 21 October have resulted in a reduction in the target overnight rate by 225 basis points since the beginning of December 2007 to its current level of 2.25 per cent.
In spite of the healthy position of Canadian financial institutions, the intensification of the global financial crisis has led to a substantial tightening of credit conditions in Canada.
Given the high degree of volatility and risk aversion in recent weeks, there is considerable uncertainty around any assessment of current credit conditions in Canada.
In particular, it is difficult to measure the non-price factors that may limit the availability of credit.
Credit spreads for financial institutions, as measured by the difference between a weighted average of borrowing rates across the term structure and the expected overnight rate, spiked to around 200 basis points in early October.
While strong actions taken by governments and central banks to support financial institutions have led to some retracement in these spreads, it is expected that spreads will be reduced only slowly as confidence is gradually rebuilt.
Since the onset of the financial market turbulence in August 2007, effective borrowing costs for Canadian financial institutions have eased somewhat, with the rise in credit spreads more than offset by the 225-basis-point cumulative reduction in the target overnight rate.
These indicative borrowing costs likely do not, however, adequately take account of the decreased availability coming from illiquid and risk-averse interbank markets.
Deteriorating conditions in financial markets in recent weeks have also severely impaired the access of Canadian non-financial firms to short-term and long-term debt markets.
In addition, non-price-related terms and conditions for bank intermediated credit have continued to tighten.
Even before the recent intensification of the financial crisis, respondents to the Bank's Senior Loan Officer Survey and Business Outlook Survey reported widespread tightening in both the pricing and availability of credit.
Growth of business credit has fallen slightly below its historical average.
Credit growth for Canadian households has slowed only slightly in recent months and, based on the most recent data, remains surprisingly strong by historical or international comparisons.
There is little evidence thus far that non-price related terms or conditions have tightened significantly for household borrowers.
Growth in household credit is, however, expected to moderate further as housing prices decline modestly and as real income growth decelerates.
The trade-weighted index for the Canadian dollar has fallen by 14 per cent since the July Update.
Major currencies have been strongly affected by mounting concerns over a global recession, changing expectations about policy rates, and by portfolio adjustments resulting from financial dislocations.
The Canadian dollar has traded in a wide range of about 83 to 100 cents US since the July Update.
It has depreciated sharply over the past few weeks to around 85 cents US, reflecting a substantial pullback in commodity prices from record-high levels, as well as the factors noted above.
The Bank's base-case projection for the global and Canadian economies through to the end of 2010 is presented in this section.
The projection assumes that the Canadian dollar will average 85 cents US, close to its current level, and that energy prices will move along a path consistent with recent futures prices.
Most importantly, the base case assumes that the coordinated Plan of Action recently announced by the G7 countries will stabilize global financial markets and that credit conditions in Canada will gradually improve as these extraordinary measures take hold.
Growth in the global economy is projected to decline from 3.7 per cent in 2008 to 2.8 per cent in 2009, well below the potential growth rate of the global economy, reaching levels that most economists would associate with recessionary conditions.
The weakness will be most evident in the major advanced economies, which are expected to grow at average annual rates between -0.1 and 0.6 per cent in 2009, before gaining strength in the latter part of the year and through 2010.
These significant downward revisions to the Bank's projections are due largely to the financial system turmoil and tighter credit conditions that are assumed to be more persistent and more pervasive across countries than in previous Monetary Policy Reports.
These financial headwinds will take time to dissipate, even with the extraordinary recent policy actions just announced.
The headwinds are expected to adversely affect consumer and business confidence, thereby contributing to a sharper and more protracted downturn.
The global economy is expected to pick up in 2010, as financial conditions improve, monetary policy stimulus takes hold, housing sectors in the United States and Europe stabilize, and the effects of the earlier rise in commodity prices recede.
While credit spreads for corporate and household borrowing are expected to improve over the course of the projection horizon, higher borrowing costs, reduced availability of credit as financial deleveraging proceeds, and tighter lending standards will continue to exert a significant drag on real economic activity.
Other drivers of household spending have also weakened more than anticipated, with continued declines in housing and financial wealth, and employment losses reducing real disposable income.
After falling by a projected 1.7 per cent in the third quarter of 2008, US real GDP is expected to fall by a further 2.5 per cent in the fourth quarter, and by 0.5 per cent in the first quarter of 2009, as the stimulus of temporary tax rebates on household consumption fades and tighter credit conditions and confidence effects take hold.
Several factors, however, begin to support a modest recovery through 2009 and then lead to above-potential growth in 2010.
These factors include low policy interest rates, the gradual elimination of excess supply in the housing sector, and the normalization of credit conditions, which are expected to support the recovery in domestic demand.
In addition, US exports should continue to benefit from the past and expected real depreciation of the US dollar.
Recent data also indicate significantly less momentum in short term growth in Europe and Japan than previously assumed.
Domestic demand will also be dampened by tighter credit conditions and relatively high commodity prices.
In the United Kingdom and in the euro area, the ongoing correction in the housing sector will also reduce household and business spending.
The base-case projection assumes monetary and fiscal policy action to support a sustainable rate of growth in these countries while alleviating underlying inflationary pressures.
In key emerging-market economies, such as China, a shift towards a relatively greater contribution from domestic demand, as opposed to exports, is assumed to be facilitated by a gradual real effective appreciation of their currencies and strong income growth.
Financial conditions are expected to be less severe than in the advanced economies.
Prices for non-energy commodities are projected to decrease by about 10 per cent between the fourth quarter of 2008 and the end of 2010, somewhat more than previously expected, reflecting softer demand for commodities as the global economy slows.
Prices for crude oil are assumed to be in a range of US$81 to US$88 per barrel over the projection horizon based on recent futures prices.
This is considerably lower than the prices assumed in the July Update.
Futures prices for natural gas are also lower than assumed in the last Update.
With tight supplies and considerable uncertainty about demand, commodity prices are expected to remain volatile for some time.
Three significant global developments over the past few months - intensification of the financial crisis, the much weaker growth outlook for the United States and other industrialized economies, and the sharply lower profile for commodity prices, especially energy prices - have adversely affected the outlook for the Canadian economy.
As a result, GDP growth in the Bank's base-case projection for Canada is considerably lower in the second half of 2008 and throughout 2009 than in the July Update.
On an average annual basis, the economy is now projected to grow by 0.6 per cent in 2008 and 2009, and by 3.4 per cent in 2010.
The reduced growth of consumer spending reflects lower projected real income related to the recent reversal in commodity prices, the downward revision to the assumption for potential output growth, and a reduction in household net worth from the recent drop in equity prices and a projected modest decline in housing prices.
With the changes in the terms and availability of financing and some decline in confidence, housing investment is projected to move into line with changing demographic requirements more rapidly than previously assumed.
This implies a larger decline in real residential activity over 2009 and 2010 than projected in the July Update.
Business investment is also expected to decrease towards the end of this year and through 2009, as a result of the slowdown in global GDP growth, the tightening of credit conditions, and the high level of uncertainty following the intensification of the global financial crisis.
However, owing to the weaker growth of final domestic demand, import growth is also expected to decrease.
Taken together, this results in a smaller drag on overall growth from net exports in 2009.
With the Canadian economy having moved into excess supply in the third quarter of 2008, and with below-potential growth projected through 2009, spare production capacity continues to increase.
However, the return of financial conditions to a more normal state, coupled with the stimulus provided by an accommodative stance of monetary policy, is expected to support a significant acceleration in consumer and capital expenditures in 2010.
Exports are also expected to recover in 2010, in response to a lower exchange rate, the completion of the US housing correction, and the recovery of the US economy more generally.
Excess supply will be absorbed through 2010, with the economy projected to operate at full potential in early 2011.
Core CPI is projected to edge up to 1.8 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2008, as the impact of earlier reductions in automobile prices diminishes and more than offsets the slight downward pressure exerted by excess supply in the economy.
However, modest reductions in housing prices and a widening output gap should cause the core rate to ease in 2009, reaching a low of 1.5 per cent.
As the amount of excess supply diminishes, and with some upward pressure from increases in import costs, the core rate is expected to move up to 2 per cent by the end of 2010.
The projection for the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI is lower than that in the last Update, owing mainly to the lower assumed prices for crude oil.
Total CPI inflation is projected to fall below 1 per cent in mid-2009.
With inflation expectations well anchored and aggregate demand and supply returning to balance, total inflation is expected to return to the 2 per cent target by the end of 2010.
The evolution of the financial crisis, its impact on the global economy, and the timing of the effect of the various extraordinary measures being taken to address it pose significant risks to the projection on both the upside and the downside.
On the downside, although the extraordinary initiatives being undertaken to provide liquidity, recapitalize banks, and restore credit flows will improve the functioning of markets and the amount of credit extension, there is the risk that this process could take longer than assumed in the base-case projection.
Furthermore, the interplay between tighter credit conditions and slowing economic activity could be even more severe than assumed, depressing the outlook for global growth, the level of commodity prices, and prospects for Canadian economic growth, thereby reducing inflation pressures.
On the upside, the improvement in financial conditions could be more rapid than assumed in the base-case projection.
This, together with the boost to business and consumer confidence that such a resolution would likely engender, represents an upside risk to the projection for Canadian growth and inflation.
In addition to this principal area of risk, there are several other upside and downside risks to the projection for inflation in Canada.
Global inflationary pressures continue to pose some upside risk.
Although commodity prices have declined and global aggregate demand is weakening, there are still indications of underlying inflation pressures in emerging-market economies that could spill over to Canada through higher-than-projected import prices.
Second, while potential growth has been marked down in the base case, productivity could continue to disappoint, further reducing growth in potential output and increasing inflationary pressures.
Third, business investment could pick up more than projected, given expressed intentions and the ability of many firms to finance from internal sources.
On the downside, as consumer spending slows, retailers could increase discounting, given the high profit margins that currently exist.
This would put more downward pressure on inflation in Canada.
There could also be additional downward pressure on inflation from housing prices, particularly in areas where there has been a very sharp run-up in prices.
The outlook for the global economy has deteriorated significantly since the October Monetary Policy Report.
The financial crisis intensified last autumn and spilled over into an already weak global economy, which, in turn, put further strains on the financial system.
This dynamic contributed to heightened uncertainty and a collapse of confidence, compounding the situation.
The major advanced economies, including Canada, are now in recession, and emerging-market countries are increasingly affected.
In response to the sudden downturn in global demand, there have been further declines in commodity prices, especially for energy, and global inflationary pressures have abated rapidly.
Policy-makers have responded to the fall in global economic activity with bold and concerted policy actions.
Central banks have cut monetary policy rates aggressively since last October, and governments in many countries are enacting substantial fiscal stimulus packages.
Additional initiatives to stabilize financial institutions in advanced economies are now under way, and the extraordinary measures taken by central banks and governments are starting to gain traction.
However, with a negative feedback loop between the weak economy and financial markets, it will take some time for conditions to normalize.
Economic activity in Canada is projected to decline through mid-2009 as a result of these global developments.
Canadian exports are already falling sharply in response to the downturn in external demand, especially from the United States.
Reductions in real income associated with the reversal in commodity prices, together with steep declines in confidence and reductions in household net worth, are leading to a decline in final domestic demand.
The Canadian economy is expected to recover in the second half of 2009 and to grow above potential in 2010, as policy actions begin to take hold, both in Canada and globally.
Support will also be provided from the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar.
On an average annual basis, real GDP is projected to decline by 1.2 per cent in 2009 and to rebound by 3.8 per cent in 2010.
The Canadian economy moved into excess supply in the fourth quarter of 2008.
Excess supply is expected to build sharply in the first half of 2009 and is not projected to be fully eliminated until mid-2011.
With the sharp widening of the output gap, together with modest decreases in housing prices, core CPI inflation in Canada is projected to ease through 2009, reaching an anticipated low of 1.1 per cent by the fourth quarter.
Total CPI inflation is expected to fall much more abruptly, dipping below zero in the second and third quarters of 2009, reflecting year-on-year drops in energy prices.
With inflation expectations well anchored, total and core CPI inflation are projected to return to the Bank's 2 per cent target in the first half of 2011, as the economy returns to potential.
Against this background, the Bank lowered its policy rate by 50 basis points on 20 January, bringing the cumulative monetary policy easing to 350 basis points since December 2007.
Guided by Canada's inflation-targeting framework, the Bank will continue to monitor carefully economic and financial developments in judging to what extent further monetary stimulus will be required to achieve the 2 per cent target over the medium term.
Low, stable, and predictable inflation is the best contribution monetary policy can make to long-term economic growth and financial stability.
Global developments continue to pose significant risks to the Bank's inflation projection for Canada, on both the upside and the downside.
On the upside, the global economy could be stronger if global fiscal stimulus turns out to be more expansionary than expected, or if the aggressive policy actions taken simultaneously across major economies reduce uncertainty and restore confidence more quickly than assumed.
On the downside, the global recession could be deeper and more protracted because financial conditions take longer to normalize.
More generally, there are risks around the resolution of global imbalances.
While cyclical developments appear to be contributing to a narrowing of large current account imbalances, a lasting and orderly resolution will require policies to promote a rebalancing of domestic demand across major economic areas.
Although the outlook is subject to a high degree of uncertainty, the Bank judges that the risks to its inflation projection are roughly balanced.
The global economy has deteriorated significantly since the October Report, with the deepening financial crisis spilling over to real economic activity.
The major advanced economies are now in recession, and the synchronized nature of the contraction is increasingly affecting emerging-market countries through trade, financial, and confidence channels.
Uncertainty about the outlook remains high and is a contributing factor restraining activity.
As a result of substantially weaker global demand, commodity prices have fallen, particularly for energy.
Oil prices have declined by 50 per cent since October.
The drop in commodity prices has contributed to sharp declines in headline inflation in many countries.
Measures of core inflation have also started to ease, reflecting growing excess supply and some pass-through from lower commodity prices.
Policy-makers have responded to the sharp fall-off in economic activity with a series of bold policy actions.
Easing inflationary pressures have prompted central banks to cut rates to extraordinarily low levels.
In some countries, such as the United States and Japan, where policy rates are close to zero, monetary authorities are resorting to other means of credit easing.
Policy-makers are also turning increasingly to discretionary fiscal policy measures to stimulate domestic demand.
The US economy registered a small decline in the third quarter of 2008, and recent indicators suggest that it contracted sharply in the fourth quarter.
Consumption has continued to decline because of substantial employment losses, reduced credit availability, an unprecedented fall in household wealth, and low consumer confidence.
Industrial production has declined dramatically, reflecting a broad-based contraction of activity in the manufacturing sector.
Sales and production of motor vehicles, in particular, have been much weaker than anticipated.
Across other major regions, there has been a sudden unexpected decline in economic activity.
In Europe and Asia, key indicators, such as consumer confidence and purchasing managers' indexes, point to a further deterioration in growth prospects.
In Europe, tightening credit conditions and the reduction in house prices and financial wealth have been important factors behind flagging domestic demand; in Japan, the appreciation of the yen and the weakness in export markets have been key drivers.
For many emerging-market economies, the recent reversal in capital flows is depressing demand by significantly constraining the availability of credit.
Sharp declines in trade credit, in particular, appear to be having a significant impact on global trade.
Economic conditions in Canada have also deteriorated significantly since the October Report, notwithstanding a small positive surprise to growth in the third quarter of 2008.
As a result of the recent sharp decline in global economic activity, the Canadian economy has entered a recession.
Real GDP rose at an annual rate of 1.3 per cent in the third quarter of 2008, after virtually no change in the first half of the year.
Both net exports and inventory investment made a slight contribution to real GDP growth, in contrast to the overall drag they exerted in the first half.
Growth of final domestic demand, however, slowed markedly in the third quarter, reflecting both slower growth in real incomes and heightened uncertainty in the face of the deepening global recession.
Export volumes continued to fall, with especially large declines in farm, energy, and forestry products.
Data for the fourth quarter of 2008 suggest that real GDP contracted at an annual rate of 2.3 per cent - much larger than the 0.4 per cent decrease projected in the October Report.
With the considerable downturn in US economic activity, Canadian exports (particularly automotive products) are expected to register a sharp drop.
Given the recent declines in our terms of trade, real income growth, and confidence, Canadian households and businesses are becoming increasingly cautious.
As a result, domestic demand, especially in housing and business investment (including inventories), is expected to have decreased in the fourth quarter.
The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap suggests that the economy was operating about 1 per cent below its production potential in the fourth quarter of 2008.
In the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey, the percentage of respondents reporting some pressures on capacity fell below average, while the percentage reporting labour shortages dropped to its lowest level in the 10-year history of the survey.
Movements in the total CPI over the past six months have mainly reflected the impact of fluctuating crude oil prices.
After peaking at 3.5 per cent in August, the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI fell to 2.0 per cent in November, somewhat lower than expected in the October Report.
The core rate of inflation averaged 1.7 per cent from August to October, but jumped to 2.4 per cent in November - much higher than in the October base-case projection.
A marked reduction in sales incentives for 2009 motor vehicles, relative to those for 2008 models, contributed to the increase.
There was also a further increase in core food prices in November.
These positive surprises to core inflation are not expected to persist, given the weak demand conditions in the automotive sector and the sharp drop in food commodity prices over the past year.
Measures of near-term inflation expectations have been volatile over the past six months, reflecting the sharp swings in energy prices.
After reaching recent highs in mid-008, expectations for average inflation over the next two years, as reported in the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey, fell markedly.
The latest Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation is 0.7 per cent for 2009, but moves back up to 1.9 per cent for 2010.
Taking this and other information into account, the Bank judges that medium - and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored to the 2 per cent inflation target.
Stabilization of the global financial system is a precondition for economic recovery.
There are signs that the extraordinary measures taken by central banks and governments to stabilize the financial system and restore the flow of credit are starting to gain traction.
Spreads in targeted markets have narrowed, and volatility has eased slightly from extraordinarily high levels.
Conditions in global financial markets, nevertheless, remain strained.
With the deteriorating global economic outlook now feeding back onto these pressures, it will take some time for conditions to normalize.
In longer-term credit markets, conditions have worsened in recent months, especially for lower-quality borrowers.
Issuance activity has been very light until recently, except for securities bearing a government guarantee.
The cost of funds for business borrowers remains exceptionally high relative to government yields.
Moreover, surveys of senior loan officers in a number of advanced countries point to a substantial tightening in bank lending standards, suggesting that access to credit may have fallen further.
Global equity markets have also continued to decline, with the indexes of all major and emerging markets reaching multi-year lows.
The ongoing fragile state of global financial conditions continues to restrict the availability of funds to support real economic activity and has contributed to uncertainty and flagging confidence, which are further eroding domestic demand in many countries.
Canadian credit conditions remain better than those in other major countries.
Borrowing costs for banks have decreased since the October Report, owing to the reduction in the policy interest rate and significant ongoing efforts to provide liquidity to the Canadian financial system.
The estimated spread between the weighted average of bank borrowing rates across the term structure and the expected overnight rate has narrowed since October from a peak of 200 basis points to a current level of around 170 basis points.
The narrowing of spreads, together with the decline in the overnight interest rate, has reduced overall bank funding costs by approximately 100 basis points since October.
Consistent with these developments, the effective average interest rate paid by households has also eased and is well below the levels that existed when the financial turbulence began in August 2007.
Bank lending to households has slowed only moderately and continues to expand at a pace well above the historical average.
One of the factors helping to explain the strength of household credit growth has been the resilience of labour markets up to October.
Business credit also grew at a solid pace from September to November (the last data point available), as an increase in bank lending more than offset a decline in market sources of funds.
Nonetheless, respondents to the Bank's latest Senior Loan Officer Survey and Business Outlook Survey reported ongoing tightening in both the pricing and availability of credit, which, combined with weak demand conditions, is likely to reduce credit growth going forward.
Yields on investment-grade corporate bonds have been broadly flat, despite the decline in yields on government bonds, and corporate borrowers (especially those below investment grade) have generally been finding it difficult to raise funds in capital markets.
Foreign exchange markets have remained extremely volatile over the past three months, with the Canadian dollar trading in a range of about 77 to 87 cents US and averaging 82 cents.
Two main factors have been driving recent movements in the dollar.
First, the fall in commodity prices, particularly energy prices, has put downward pressure on the Canadian dollar.
Second, the US dollar appreciated against most major currencies through October and November, possibly reflecting sizable repatriation of assets by investors who manage their funds in US dollars.
The Bank's base-case projection incorporates the following key assumptions: a Canada/US exchange rate averaging 82 cents US; energy prices moving in line with current futures prices; prices for non-energy commodities easing slightly over the near term; tight global credit conditions persisting through 2009, and improving gradually in 2010; and an unchanged outlook for Canadian potential output growth relative to the October Report (i.e., 2.4 per cent through the remainder of 2009, and 2.5 per cent in 2010).
In addition, substantial fiscal policy stimulus is assumed, globally and in Canada.
Global economic growth is projected to slow to 1.1 per cent in 2009 - a rate consistent with a deep global recession - and to pick up in 2010, but remain below the rate of potential output growth.
Economic activity in all regions is expected to be much weaker over the next couple of years than projected in the October Report because of a more protracted and widespread weakness in global financial markets and a stronger negative feedback to the real economy.
Heightened uncertainty is also contributing to slower growth.
US economic growth is expected to decline through the first three quarters of 2009, as consumption and business investment continue to contract and exports weaken.
Annual US GDP growth is projected to average -1.7 per cent in 2009 and 2.6 per cent in 2010.
As a result of this weaker outlook, US core inflation will be much lower over the projection horizon and is expected to remain below 1 per cent for most of the next three years.
Several factors are expected to underpin the recovery in the global economy.
First, as the measures to stabilize the financial sector taken around the world gain more traction, global credit conditions should begin to normalize, bolstering growth by increasing the availability of credit to businesses and consumers, and restoring confidence.
Second, the easing in monetary policy and simultaneous fiscal policy expansion will stimulate domestic demand globally.
Third, the drag exerted by the housing market correction in the United States and in some other industrial countries should diminish, and construction activity should then pick up as excess supply in that sector is gradually eliminated.
Strengthening US GDP growth, and the accompanying improvement in consumer confidence, should also help to stimulate global economic activity through trade and financial linkages.
Real GDP in Canada is expected to decline markedly in the first half of 2009, especially in the first quarter.
This leaves the level of aggregate output by mid-year much lower than expected in the October Report.
On an average annual basis, real GDP decreases by 1.2 per cent in 2009.
Final domestic demand is projected to decrease in 2009.
Reduced real incomes and net worth, along with much lower confidence levels, weigh heavily on household spending, with housing investment expected to decrease considerably.
Weak global growth, much lower commodity prices, tighter credit conditions, and heightened uncertainty about economic prospects lead to a projected fall in business investment, including inventory investment.
With the expected weakness of foreign demand (especially from the United States), Canadian export volumes are projected to decrease still further through 2009.
However, given the projected decline in domestic demand, imports are also expected to fall considerably.
Consequently, there is only a slight drag to growth coming from net exports.
The anticipated normalization of financial conditions, together with the stimulus coming from monetary and fiscal policies, should boost the growth of consumer spending in 2010.
Exports are also expected to recover next year as the US economy strengthens and the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar stimulates foreign demand.
Excess supply will be gradually reduced, with the economy projected to return to balance by mid-2011.
The projected return to balance of the Canadian economy is faster than either of the recoveries following the 1981-82 and 1990-92 recessions.
In contrast to these earlier episodes, with an explicit 2 per cent inflation target since 1991 and expectations of inflation well anchored to this target, monetary policy has been able to react in a timely and significant way to help offset the economic downturn and promote conditions to support recovery.
In addition, Canada enters this recession with greater fiscal flexibility and stronger corporate balance sheets than in the recession of the 1990s.
The sharp widening of the output gap, together with modest decreases in house prices, should cause the core rate of inflation to ease through 2009, reaching a projected low of 1.1 per cent by the fourth quarter.
With the gradual reduction in excess supply and upward pressure coming from increased import costs, and with inflation expectations well anchored, the core rate is projected to return to the 2 per cent target in the first half of 2011.
The projected 12-month rate of change in the total CPI in 2009 is much lower than in the October Report, reflecting year-on-year drops in energy prices.
Indeed, the rate of change in the total CPI is expected to fall below zero in the second and third quarters.
Total CPI inflation is projected to move back up to about 1.6 per cent in early 2010, and to reach the 2 per cent target in the first half of 2011.
Deteriorating credit conditions have spread quickly through trade, financial, and confidence channels.
While more aggressive monetary and fiscal policy actions are under way across the g-20, measures to stabilize the global financial system have taken longer than expected to enact.
As a result, the recession in Canada will be deeper than anticipated, with the economy projected to contract by 3.0 per cent in 2009.
The Bank now expects the recovery to be delayed until the fourth quarter and to be more gradual.
The economy is projected to grow by 2.5 per cent in 2010 and 4.7 per cent in 2011, and to reach its production capacity in the third quarter of 2011.
Given significant restructuring in a number of sectors, potential growth has been revised down.
The recovery will be importantly supported by the Bank's accommodative monetary stance.
The Bank expects core inflation to diminish through 2009, gradually returning to the 2 per cent target in the third quarter of 2011 as aggregate supply and demand return to balance.
Total CPI inflation is expected to trough at -0.8 per cent in the third quarter of 2009 and return to target in the third quarter of 2011.
On the upside, confidence may return more rapidly than anticipated if convincing action is taken more quickly than assumed to address financial system weaknesses in major economies.
This could result in a stronger-than-projected recovery in the global economy as the aggressive and coordinated macroeconomic policy actions already being implemented take effect.
On the downside, the global recession could be deeper and more protracted than envisaged if the resolution of these financial system problems is delayed further.
When monetary policy is conducted at the effective lower bound, the uncertainty regarding the effects of unconventional monetary policies in the event that the recession turns out to be more protracted than expected, and the resulting need for prudence in the use of these instruments, imply that the overall risks to the Bank's inflation projection are tilted slightly to the downside.
On 21 April, the Bank lowered its target for the overnight rate by one-quarter of a percentage point to 1/4 per cent, which the Bank judges to be the effective lower bound for that rate.
Conditional on the outlook for inflation, the target overnight rate can be expected to remain at its current level until the end of the second quarter of 2010 in order to achieve the inflation target.
The Bank will continue to provide guidance in its scheduled interest rate announcements as long as the overnight rate is at the effective lower bound.
To reinforce its conditional commitment to maintain the overnight rate at 1/4 per cent, the Bank will roll over a portion of its existing stock of 1 - and 3-month term purchase and resale agreements into 6 - and 12-month terms at minimum and maximum bid rates that correspond to the target rate and the Bank rate, respectively.
The 21 April decision brings the cumulative monetary policy easing to 425 basis points since December 2007.
It is the Bank's judgment that this cumulative easing, together with the conditional commitment, is the appropriate policy stance to move the economy back to full production capacity and to achieve the 2 per cent inflation target.
The Bank retains considerable flexibility in the conduct of monetary policy at low interest rates.
The annex to this report describes the Bank of Canada's approach to conducting monetary policy when the overnight interest rate is at the effective lower bound.
Additional stimulus could be provided, if needed, through quantitative and/or credit easing.
Definitions of these actions and the principles guiding their possible use can be found in the annex.
While the global recession has intensified since the January Update and become more synchronous, the broad profile of the Bank's outlook remains consistent with the projection at that time.
A deepening financial crisis in the united states and Europe triggered a severe recession in the global economy at the end of 2008, as deteriorating conditions in the advanced economies spread quickly around the world through trade, financial, and confidence channels.
Concerted policy measures across the g-20 provide the necessary and appropriate support for global recovery, although the recovery will be delayed by slower progress in stabilizing the global financial system than previously anticipated.
Heightened uncertainty surrounding the global outlook, together with declining wealth and tighter credit conditions, has adversely affected confidence levels, causing households and firms to cut back spending sharply.
The knock-on effect on global trade has been much larger than expected, reflecting both a sudden collapse in trade credit and an abrupt inventory correction in the auto and electronics sectors.
Export-oriented countries in Asia and Europe have experienced sharp declines in industrial production.
The pervasive and intense nature of the economic downturn has exacerbated strains on Banks' balance sheets and further constrained the availability of credit to businesses and households, leading to additional weakness in demand.
As a result of this adverse feedback loop, global GDP growth has hit post-world war ii lows in recent quarters.
Policy-makers in the major economies have responded to the global crisis with bold policy actions.
The G-20 countries have committed to do whatever is necessary to restore growth and stability in their economies.
Monetary authorities have lowered policy rates aggressively, and several central banks have adopted unconventional monetary policy measures, including quantitative and credit easing.
fiscal authorities have introduced substantial stimulus packages to help offset the drop in domestic and foreign demand.
The fact that these fiscal initiatives are being undertaken simultaneously in several countries will augment their impact.
The effects of these policies will be increasingly felt over time and should reach full force in 2010.
Timely and credible action is required to address the impaired assets on bank balance sheets and to restore the normal flow of credit - a precondition for sustained economic recovery.
Progress on these measures has been slower than expected in the united states and other major financial centres.
However, comprehensive programs have recently been outlined to provide additional liquidity, guarantee bank balance sheets, dispose of bad assets, and recapitalize as appropriate.
The challenge now is to ensure their rapid and effective implementation.
As anticipated in the January Update, economic activity in the united states contracted sharply in the fourth quarter of 2008, and recent indicators suggest a similar contraction in the first quarter of 2009.
The weakness was most evident in sectors that are particularly important for Canadian exports, magnifying the effects of the US.
Downturn on the Canadian economy.
US residential construction has remained very weak, with a large overhang of unsold houses continuing to put downward pressure on house prices and building activity.
Motor vehicle sales and production have also experienced a sharp cyclical and structural correction, as manufacturers cut output in response to sagging demand, mounting losses, and limited access to auto financing.
There are, nevertheless, early signs that activity levels in both the housing and auto sectors may be starting to stabilize in response to the sizable adjustments that have taken place.
In Europe and Japan, the decline in output has been more acute than expected over the recent period, as falling external demand and mounting internal strains spilled over into the domestic economy.
Deteriorating conditions in housing markets, falling consumer and business confidence, and continuing difficulties in the financial sectors of many overseas countries have added to these external pressures.
Output growth in china has moderated, but has nevertheless remained much stronger than that in most other emerging-market economies.
Aggressive fiscal stimulus measures and monetary easing have boosted domestic demand and partly offset the fall in exports.
Following a sharp decline in the second half of 2008, commodity prices appear to have levelled off.
Production cuts by OPEC have outpaced the fall in global demand, contributing to a modest recovery in oil prices.
While the price of natural gas has continued to decline, prices of other, non-energy, commodities have recently increased.
As highlighted in the January Update, stabilization of the global financial system remains a precondition for economic recovery.
Despite some recent signs of improvement, market conditions are mixed, and the outlook remains uncertain.
on the positive side, there are indications that the aggressive actions taken by central banks and governments are beginning to gain traction, and volatility has fallen in a number of financial markets.
In addition, stock markets, after reaching multi-year lows earlier this year, have started to price in a more positive outlook.
Global credit markets, in contrast, are still fragile, with improvements largely confined to short-term funding markets, while longer-term spreads remain elevated.
The cost of funds for business borrowers - especially lower-quality credit risks also remains high, and surveys of senior loan officers indicate that lending standards for consumers continue to tighten, albeit at a slower pace.
Conditions in global financial markets over the next few quarters will be shaped by two main developments.
The first concerns the weaker current state of the real economy and the additional credit-related losses that this might entail for financial institutions, as delinquencies and loan losses begin to rise.
The second development relates to remedial efforts directed at the illiquid legacy assets on banks' balance sheets.
Stress tests designed to provide a credible and comprehensive assessment of the true situation, together with capital injections and guarantees, should facilitate price discovery, reduce concerns about counterparty risk, and boost liquidity.
Although the normalization of financial conditions is likely to be delayed by the increased drag coming from the real economy and from the delayed implementation of remedial measures in the banking sector, on balance, more widespread improvements should become evident by mid-2010.
Global economic growth for 2009 has been revised down in the Bank's latest projection, reflecting the recent sharp decline in economic activity.
The growth profile also incorporates a delayed and slightly more protracted recovery compared with that in the January Update.
As a result, output growth is now projected to remain negative for most of 2009 and to begin to absorb excess production capacity only towards the middle of 2010.
The return to potential will be postponed by the self-reinforcing nature of the adverse feedback loop that has developed, and by the additional drag exerted by a financial system that will take longer to stabilize.
Inflation rates are consequently expected to be lower than previously projected, and to dip below zero in some countries.
Global output is now projected to fall by 0.8 per cent in 2009, and to increase by a more modest 2.2 per cent in 2010 - well below the rate of growth of global potential output.
Three important factors will help support the gradual recovery.
First, economic activity in all major regions should be boosted by the strong and simultaneous monetary and fiscal policy actions that have been undertaken, which will raise aggregate demand and help to restore consumer and business confidence.
Second, as measures to stabilize the financial system begin to take hold, businesses and households should become less credit-constrained.
Third, the drag exerted by the housing market correction in the united states and several other industrial countries should diminish, leading to a pickup in construction activity.
As anticipated in the January Update, the recovery in the united states will be much more muted than normal.
Sustained positive growth will likely be deferred by one quarter compared with the Bank's earlier projection, owing to the delayed implementation of stabilization measures in the banking sector.
annual GDP growth in the united states is projected to average -2.4 per cent in 2009 and 1.2 per cent in 2010, as diminished wealth, a weak labour market, tight credit conditions, and reduced confidence restrain growth in consumption and business investment.
Activity is expected to stabilize in the second half of 2009 and to begin rising in early 2010, exceeding the growth rate of potential output and starting to take up excess capacity.
Sales and production of motor vehicles, which are currently well below replacement rates, are projected to rebound in the second half of 2009 but to levels significantly lower than their pre-crisis levels, as the auto sector continues to restructure.
The housing sector, which has acted as a major drag on growth, should also finally stabilize in the second half of 2009 and contribute to the recovery.
completion of the inventory cycle in motor vehicles will lead to a gradual pickup in Asian and European auto production, while accelerating US growth will stimulate global economic activity through improved trade and financial flows, as well as rising confidence.
Economic growth in china, in contrast, is expected to remain relatively robust, assisted by the introduction of additional fiscal and monetary stimulus measures to boost domestic demand and reduce the country's reliance on exports.
Economic conditions in other emerging-market economies are projected to improve gradually over this period, producing a synchronous boost in global demand and providing some support for commodity prices over the medium term.
Energy prices are assumed to move in line with current futures prices, while non-energy prices are expected to strengthen gradually as economic activity recovers.
In the January Update, the Bank projected a sharp recession in Canada, followed by a relatively muted recovery starting in the third quarter of this year.
As a result of the more severe, synchronized nature of the global downturn, the recession in Canada is even deeper than anticipated.
As well, the Bank now expects the recovery to be delayed until the fourth quarter of 2009 and to be more gradual than projected in January.
Nonetheless, the Bank is still projecting a rebound to above-potential growth in 2010, albeit with a lower estimate of potential output growth.
As explained in January, the recovery should be supported by a number of factors, including the timeliness and scale of the Bank's monetary policy response; our relatively well-functioning financial system and the gradual improvement in financial conditions in Canada; the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar; stimulative fiscal policy measures; the gradual rebound in external demand; the strength of Canadian household, business, and bank balance sheets; and the end of the stock adjustments in Canadian and US Residential housing.
Export volumes fell sharply in the fourth quarter of 2008, led by dramatic declines in exports of motor vehicles and construction-related products to the united states.
The terms of trade also plunged, causing real gross domestic income to register its largest quarterly decline on record.
Canadian households reduced their spending by more than anticipated in response to the decline in their net worth and an elevated level of economic uncertainty.
In total, the volume of final sales of goods declined by about 11 per cent (at annual rates) in the final quarter of 2008.
given the surprising speed and magnitude of this decline, firms were slow to adjust production and therefore accumulated unwanted inventories.
The stock-to-sales ratio rose to its highest level in more than a decade.
Although this mitigated the decline in real GDP in the quarter, the 3.4 per cent (at annual rates) fall that was recorded was larger than the 2.3 per cent projected in the January Update.
An inventory correction will therefore be needed, which will put additional downward pressure on growth this year.
The economic contraction in Canada intensified significantly in the first quarter of 2009.
Exports of automotive products, forest products, and industrial materials posted further substantial declines.
Firms have started to address their inventory problems, with widespread shutdowns in the automotive sector in particular.
Business investment is expected to register another steep decline in response to rising unused capacity and weak terms of trade.
Economy-wide, firms cut about 270,000 jobs in the first quarter and reduced the average work week.
Government spending is the only component of demand expected to show positive growth in the quarter.
overall, real GDP is projected to drop at an annual rate of 7.3 per cent in the first quarter - the largest quarterly decline on record since 1961.
Recent developments are also adversely affecting the growth rate of potential output.
restructuring, especially in the automotive and forest products sectors, is expected to render some of the existing capital stock obsolete.
In light of these factors, the Bank has revised down its assumptions for the growth rate of potential output to 1.2 per cent in 2009, 1.5 per cent in 2010, and 1.9 per cent in 2011.
Excess supply in the Canadian economy emerged at the end of 2008 and has expanded rapidly.
The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap suggests that the economy was operating about 3.5 per cent below its production potential in the first quarter of 2009.
In the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey, the percentage of firms reporting that they would have difficulty meeting an unanticipated increase in demand fell to an exceptionally low level.
Labour market indicators have started to reflect the downturn in the product market.
This is particularly evident in the escalation of the unemployment rate between December and March to its highest level in seven years.
The percentage of firms reporting labour shortages in the Bank's spring survey fell to the lowest level in 10 years.
In contrast, the 12-month change in the average hourly earnings of permanent workers, reported by statistics Canada in the Labour Force Survey, has shown surprising strength since last autumn.
After reviewing all the indicators of capacity pressures, the governing council judges that the economy was operating about 3 per cent below its production capacity in the first quarter of 2009.
Total CPI inflation has evolved largely as projected in the January Update with a slightly faster deceleration in the core rate of inflation being offset by a smaller decline in energy prices.
The latter reflects larger-than-expected increases in the spreads between crude oil prices and gasoline prices.
In march, the 12-month rate of increase in total CPI was 1.2 per cent, down from 2.0 per cent in November.
The core rate of inflation reached 2.0 per cent in march, owing largely to a faster-than-expected deceleration in auto prices, which have been unusually volatile in recent months.
Core food prices have continued to rise steeply, but this is not expected to persist, given the sharp drop in the prices of agricultural commodities over the past year.
With the rise in food prices decelerating and the substantial excess supply gap that has developed, both core and total inflation are poised to slow further over the next few months.
Reflecting the weakness in the economy and past declines in energy prices, measures of near-term inflation expectations have continued to fall in recent months.
The latest consensus economics forecast for total CPI inflation is 0.2 per cent for 2009.
The forecast moves back up to 1.8 per cent for 2010, indicating that medium-term inflation expectations remain well anchored to the 2 per cent inflation target.
Financial conditions in Canada remain more favourable than in other advanced economies.
The underlying strength of the balance sheets of Canadian financial institutions, corporations, and households has made the Canadian financial system better able to weather global storms.
Nonetheless, conditions are noticeably tighter than normal, since the global crisis and its associated macroeconomic consequences have led to a widening of lending spreads in many markets and, in particular, a tightening of credit conditions for corporations.
Recently, there have been some signs of improvement, although it is too soon to conclude that conditions will return quickly to normal.
Borrowing costs for banks decreased by about 95 basis points from mid-January through mid-April, owing to the 100-basis-point reduction in the policy interest rate over that period.
The reduction in bank funding costs has, to a significant extent, been passed on to households.
The effective average nominal interest rate on household borrowing has eased further since January to well below its level at the start of the financial turbulence; it is also low by historical standards.
The growth of household credit remains surprisingly strong in light of the weakness of household spending; however, it has decelerated over the past six months, led by slower growth in residential mortgage credit, and is likely to slow further in the period ahead.
Canadian businesses are facing more difficult financing conditions.
The pricing and availability of business credit, as reported in the Bank's latest Senior Loan Officer Survey and Business Outlook Survey, tightened further over the past three months.
Credit spreads for both financial and non-financial issuers remain near record levels but have begun to narrow recently; with the continued decline in government yields, the level of borrowing rates has held relatively steady.
Issuance by non-financial corporations is running at a higher level than in the same period last year, as investors have been attracted by the high spreads available on corporate bonds issued by good-quality borrowers, while corporations have taken advantage of the improved access to capital markets to lock in longer-term funding.
The combined effects of various financial factors impinging on real economic activity are summarized in the financial conditions index , which weights a set of financial variables in proportion to their impact on real GDP.
Such an index needs to be interpreted with caution, given the inherent difficulty of quantifying the effects of changes in financial variables on the real economy and the short span of some of the data used.
For this reason, changes in the FCI are likely to be more informative than its level.
The index shows the marked deterioration of Canadian financial conditions in the final quarter of 2008 to their tightest point in the past 10 years, as corporate bond rates and spreads rose in response to declining investor appetite for riskier assets.
Since January, financial conditions have improved somewhat, as stock market gains and a lower overnight rate have partially offset continued higher yields on corporate bonds.
Nonetheless, financial conditions remain tight.
Monetary aggregates continued to grow strongly, despite tightening financial conditions and declining nominal GDP growth.
This reflects an increase in money demand associated with low interest rates and portfolio shifts into more liquid assets.
In the three months to February, the narrow aggregate m1+ grew at an annual rate of 14.2 per cent, while M2++ grew by 9.9 per cent.
It is difficult, though, to draw the implications of this monetary expansion for economic activity, particularly since the demand for money is likely to shift even more than usual at low interest rates.
Since the January Update, the Canadian dollar has traded in a range of 77 to 83 cents US, averaging about 80 cents US.
Recent support from strengthening oil prices has been largely offset by the weakening economy, leaving the Canadian dollar largely unchanged since the January Update.
Canadian fiscal and monetary policies have been eased substantially in response to the deteriorating macroeconomic situation, as part of the coordinated global response.
Significant additional fiscal and monetary stimulus has been provided since the January Update.
The federal budget announced on 27 January will deliver substantial fiscal stimulus over the 2009-10 period, and further stimulus is being provided by provincial budgets.
The effects of this fiscal expansion will begin to be felt in the second half of 2009 and will build through next year.
Monetary policy was also eased significantly over this period, bringing the cumulative easing to 425 basis points since December 2007.
The Bank of Canada lowered its target for the overnight interest rate by 50 basis points on 3 march and by a further 25 basis points on 21 April.
The Bank judges the resulting level of the overnight rate, 25 basis points, to be the effective lower bound for that rate.
Conditional on the inflation outlook, the Bank committed to hold the target overnight rate at that level until the second quarter of 2010.
it is the Bank's judgment that this cumulative easing, together with the conditional commitment, is the appropriate policy stance to move the economy back to full capacity and to achieve the 2 per cent inflation target.
The Bank's base-case projection incorporates the following key assumptions: a Canada/US.
Exchange rate averaging 80 cents US; energy prices in line with recent futures prices; prices for non-energy commodities increasing progressively as the global economy recovers; and tight global credit conditions persisting through mid-2010, before improving gradually.
The Bank's base-case projection now sees the Canadian economy contracting through to the third quarter of 2009 (one quarter longer than in the January Update), with real GDP dropping by 3.0 per cent this year on an annual average basis.
This is much weaker than anticipated in January, reflecting two main factors: foreign weakness propagating through trade, financial, and confidence channels, which has been more intense than previously projected; and delays in the implementation of policies (especially in the united states) to stabilize and recapitalize the global financial system, which have weighed on both financial conditions and confidence.
Export volumes are projected to fall significantly in the first half of 2009, reflecting the continued weakness in foreign demand for Canadian motor vehicles, industrial goods, and commodities.
Households have also experienced an erosion in their wealth because of declines in equity and house prices.
These factors, combined with heightened uncertainty about future incomes and asset prices, have led consumers to increase their desired savings rate.
Resale activity in the housing market has slowed significantly, reflecting these developments.
Business fixed investment is expected to contract sharply in 2009, reflecting a drop in corporate profits, tight credit conditions, weak commodity prices, and the uncertain economic outlook.
The projected decline in investment spending is consistent with the results of the Bank's recent Business Outlook Survey and statistics Canada's Survey of Private and Public Investment Intentions.
Firms also need to draw down their inventories, following the sharp buildup in recent months.
Inventory decumulation is projected to subtract significantly from GDP growth during the first three quarters of this year.
Weak domestic demand in Canada is expected to lead to a large drop in import volumes in 2009, which more than offsets the weakness in sales abroad.
As in January, real GDP growth is projected to rebound to rates above that of potential output in the final quarter of 2009.
On an average annual basis, the economy is projected to grow by 2.5 per cent in 2010 and by 4.7 per cent in 2011.
A large part of the downward revision to growth in 2010 is due to the lower assumed growth rate of potential output, relative to the January Update.
The anticipated normalization of financial conditions, together with the stimulus coming from monetary and fiscal policies, should restore consumer and business confidence and boost spending in 2010.
As well, housing starts should gradually pick up, supported by historically low mortgage rates and demographic requirements of about 175,000 units per year.
Exports are expected to recover in response to the gradual improvement in external demand and the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar.
The Canadian economy is projected to grow more rapidly than the US economy in 2010 and 2011 for a number of reasons.
The need for households to repair their balance sheets is smaller in Canada than in the united states, since wealth losses have been smaller.
The housing market correction is expected to be much less severe in Canada than in the united states.
As well, Canadian exporters will benefit disproportionately from the recovery in the US.
Housing and automotive sectors, which will push the growth rate of US.
Demand for Canadian goods above the projected rate of growth of US Real GDP.
Owing to the near-term weakness in the growth of aggregate demand, excess supply in the Canadian economy continues to build, expanding in the second half of 2009 to about 4.5 per cent, roughly 0.75 percentage points larger than projected in the January Update.
As the economy picks up in the fourth quarter and accelerates in 2010-11, excess supply is gradually absorbed, and the economy is expected to reach its productive capacity in the third quarter of 2011.
The development of substantial excess supply, together with a noticeable deceleration in food prices and modest decreases in house prices, should cause the core rate of inflation to diminish through 2009, reaching a trough of 0.9 per cent in the fourth quarter.
This is slightly lower than expected in January, reflecting the wider output gap.
With excess supply being absorbed gradually, and with inflation expectations well anchored, the core rate is projected to return to 2 per cent in the third quarter of 2011.
As in January, total CPI inflation is expected to fall much more rapidly, dipping below zero in the second and third quarters of 2009, reflecting year-on-year drops in energy prices.
The weaker profile for core inflation notwithstanding, the trough for total CPI inflation is not quite as low as in the January Update, reflecting the Bank's assumption that recent margins between crude oil prices and gasoline prices will be maintained over the projection horizon.
Total CPI inflation is also expected to return to the Bank's 2 per cent target in the third quarter of 2011.
On the upside, confidence may return more rapidly than envisaged, if convincing action is taken more quickly than assumed to address financial system weaknesses in major economies.
more generally, there are risks around the resolution of global imbalances.
In addition to these global risks, important uncertainties are associated with the difficult adjustments under way in certain sectors of the Canadian economy, notably energy and automotive.
The uncertainty regarding the effects of unconventional monetary policies, in the event that the recession turns out to be more protracted than expected, and the resulting need for prudence in the use of these instruments, imply that the risks to the Bank's inflation projection are tilted slightly to the downside.
They show, in particular, the slight downward tilt to the confidence bands that results from monetary policy operating at the effective lower bound.
There are now increasing signs that economic activity has begun to expand in many countries in response to monetary and fiscal policy stimulus and measures to stabilize the global financial system.
However, the recovery is nascent.
Effective and resolute policy implementation remains critical to sustained global growth.
The dynamics of the recovery in Canada remain broadly consistent with the Bank's medium-term outlook in its April Monetary Policy Report.
Stimulative monetary and fiscal policies, improved financial conditions, firmer commodity prices, and a rebound in business and consumer confidence are spurring domestic demand growth.
However, the higher Canadian dollar, as well as ongoing restructuring in key industrial sectors, is significantly moderating the pace of overall growth.
Some of the early strength in domestic demand represents a bringing forward of household expenditures, which modestly alters the profile of growth over the projection period relative to the April Report.
The Bank projects that the economy will contract by 2.3 per cent in 2009 and then grow by 3.0 per cent in 2010 and 3.5 per cent in 2011, reaching production capacity in the middle of 2011.
Total CPI inflation declined to -0.3 per cent in June and should trough in the third quarter of this year before returning to the 2 per cent target in the second quarter of 2011 as aggregate supply and demand return to balance.
Core inflation held up at 1.9 per cent in the second quarter of 2009.
The Bank still expects core inflation to diminish in the second half of this year before gradually returning to 2 per cent in the second quarter of 2011.
Although the vigorous policy actions taken by monetary and fiscal authorities around the world appear to have reduced the probability of an extreme negative outcome for the global economy, significant upside and downside risks remain to the inflation projection for Canada.
The main upside risks to inflation relate to domestic factors, and the possibility that economic momentum will be stronger and more sustained than currently anticipated.
Another upside risk to inflation is the possibility that potential output will be lower than the Bank's revised estimate, if the extensive restructuring in certain sectors is more protracted and the investment response is more delayed than currently envisaged.
The principal downside risks to inflation relate mainly to the external sector.
The restoration of normal financial conditions could be more gradual than expected, and further setbacks cannot be precluded.
Such developments could have serious spillover effects in Canada through trade, financial, and confidence channels.
Importantly, a stronger and more volatile Canadian dollar could act as a significant drag on growth and put additional downward pressure on inflation.
While the underlying macroeconomic risks to the projection are roughly balanced, the Bank judges that, as a consequence of operating at the effective lower bound, the overall risks to its inflation projection are tilted slightly to the downside.
On 4 June and 21 July, the Bank reaffirmed its conditional commitment to maintain its target for the overnight rate at the effective lower bound of 1/4 per cent until the end of the second quarter of 2010 in order to achieve the inflation target.
The Bank retains considerable flexibility in the conduct of monetary policy at low interest rates, consistent with the framework outlined in the April Report.
The synchronous global recession that began in the last quarter of 2008 deepened in the first quarter of 2009, with a greater contraction in global demand than had been expected at the time of the April Monetary Policy Report.
The recession continued into the second quarter of 2009, but the pace of decline in output appears to have decelerated, suggesting that global economic activity is near its trough.
Vigorous policy actions across the G-20 have helped to stabilize financial markets, reduce uncertainty, and support aggregate demand.
Global equity markets have rebounded after sharp declines in 2008 and early 2009, credit spreads in key markets have narrowed, and banks have been able to raise needed capital.
Fragility in the global economy persists, nevertheless.
Financial deleveraging by banks, households, and firms is continuing, mirrored by ongoing adjustments on the real side of the economy.
Inventories, employment, and capital are adjusting to lower global demand and have contributed to a substantial reduction in real GDP growth in the major economies.
While sluggish demand and more-negative output gaps have led to declines in global inflation rates, structural adjustments in the global economy have reduced the growth of potential output and, together with price and wage rigidities, have dampened the downward pressure on inflation.
Vigorous fiscal and monetary policy measures, coupled with continuing support to the financial sector, have helped to restore consumer and business confidence and to improve financial market conditions in most economies.
Effective and resolute policy implementation remains critical to a sustained economic recovery.
In the United States, economic activity continued to decline in the first half of 2009, albeit at a slowing pace.
However, home sales have stabilized and inventories of unsold new houses have declined, indicating that the contraction in residential investment may be coming to an end.
In addition, transfers and tax cuts boosted disposable income in the second quarter, the rate of deterioration in the labour market slowed somewhat, and forward-looking indicators, such as new orders and consumer sentiment, suggest that the US economy is at its trough.
Firms cut back on production and investment in response to a deteriorating external environment, an appreciating currency, and slumping domestic demand.
Unemployment has risen, even as rigidities have slowed adjustment in the labour market.
Uncertainty about the state of the banking sector remains high, with concerns that the recently announced stress tests for European banks could uncover additional capital shortfalls associated with the severe economic downturn and exposure to Eastern Europe.
In Japan, following an unexpectedly sharp downturn in the first quarter, economic indicators for the second quarter have been more favourable.
A rapid inventory correction and announcements of additional fiscal stimulus have supported Japanese consumer and business confidence.
In China, economic activity has been much stronger than in other Asian economies, with aggressive infrastructure spending and consumer support policies boosting domestic demand and helping to offset falling exports.
Commodity prices have firmed since the April Report.
Energy prices have risen in response to large production cuts from OPEC, lower inventories, and expectations of higher energy demand, notably from Asia.
The futures curve continues to suggest higher oil prices in the period ahead.
While the rise in non-energy commodity prices has been less pronounced, metals prices have increased substantially, owing mainly to rising demand from China.
Reduced uncertainty about the global economic outlook, together with ongoing support to the financial sector, led to marked improvements in the global financial system in the second quarter of 2009.
As the probability of a more extreme negative outcome for the world economy diminished, global equity markets rebounded and started pricing in a more positive outlook.
Conditions in corporate bond markets have begun to improve in many countries, with narrowing risk premiums on corporate bonds and rising corporate bond issuance.
The completion of the stress tests for major US banks has helped to restore confidence in financial institutions, contributing to lower spreads in the interbank market.
While these signs of stabilizing financial conditions are encouraging, many of the improvements are linked to government interventions.
The markets for securitized instruments remain severely impaired, and access to credit has continued to tighten for households and businesses in many countries, as indicated by surveys of senior loan officers.
Overall, however, recent developments suggest that global financial markets are in the process of healing, as the severe distress that characterized markets after the collapse of Lehman Brothers last September dissipates.
Progress in restoring the functioning of financial markets nevertheless remains uneven.
Additional improvements necessary for a sustained economic recovery are expected to be gradual, and are contingent on banks continuing to repair their balance sheets - particularly in the United States and Europe.
The outlook for growth in the major advanced countries in 2009 and 2010 remains broadly unchanged from the April Report, but the risk of a sustained economic decline has diminished considerably.
The Bank now expects the global economy to shrink by 1.7 per cent in 2009, followed by growth of 2.3 per cent in 2010 and 3.9 per cent in 2011.
This gradual recovery of the global economy is underpinned by several critical factors.
First, extensive support to the financial sector, together with reduced uncertainty about the macroeconomic outlook, should contribute to a further normalization of financial markets, resulting in lower borrowing costs and increased availability of credit to businesses and households.
Second, the aggressive fiscal and monetary stimulus already in place should help to restore consumer and business confidence, and raise domestic demand.
Third, once corrections in the housing sectors of several economies are complete, a significant drag on growth will be removed.
Fourth, completion of the inventory cycle, most notably in the auto and IT sectors, together with a resumption of cross-border trade flows, should support the global recovery.
However, structural adjustments - most significantly in the auto sector - are expected to progress slowly, and rising unemployment and negative wealth effects will restrain consumption and investment.
The protracted nature of the recovery will add to excess production capacity in the global economy, holding down wage and price inflation.
In the United States, economic growth is expected to remain below potential in 2009 and 2010, causing unemployment to continue to rise.
Fiscal policy is expected to provide important stimulus to the economy, supporting a gradual recovery in final domestic demand.
Motor vehicle production and housing starts should also rise once inventories have adjusted, since current levels are not sufficient to cover projected replacement rates.
These developments should increase the demand for Canadian exports.
The recovery will nevertheless be gradual, since lower disposable income and the need to increase savings to rebuild household balance sheets will continue to put downward pressure on consumption through 2009 and 2010.
Annual US GDP is projected to decline by 2.4 per cent in 2009, and to grow by 1.4 per cent in 2010 and by 3.4 per cent in 2011.
The timing and speed of the recovery in other industrialized economies reflect past and current policy actions, as well as the state of their banking systems.
In Europe, the recovery is likely to be more protracted than in the United States, reflecting the less-aggressive actions taken so far by European policy-makers, as well as ongoing difficulties in the banking system.
Europe should nevertheless benefit from strengthening global growth, which would stimulate economic activity through trade, financial, and confidence linkages.
In Japan, inventory adjustments have been unexpectedly rapid, suggesting that the inventory cycle will exert less drag on output in the near term.
Newly announced fiscal stimulus and continuing support from monetary policy should boost domestic demand, helping to offset the weak external environment.
Economic growth in China is expected to strengthen as fiscal and monetary stimulus increase domestic demand and help reduce the country's reliance on exports.
In other emerging-market economies, economic conditions were very weak in the first half of 2009, but are projected to recover gradually over 2009 and 2010, contributing to higher global demand and providing further support for commodity prices over the medium term.
At the time of the April Report, the Bank projected that the recession in Canada would deepen further and that a muted recovery would start in the fourth quarter of 2009.
Factors underpinning the projected recovery included monetary and fiscal stimulus, improvements in global financial conditions and confidence, the beginning of the recovery in the global economy, and a strengthening in the terms of trade.
However, with the economy supported by better financial conditions and higher levels of business and consumer confidence than anticipated, the downturn in activity in the first half of the year has been less severe, and growth is now projected to turn positive in the third quarter.
In part, this earlier pickup in GDP growth represents a bringing forward of household expenditures relative to the Bank's previous projections, which modestly alters the profile of growth over the projection period.
Aside from these timing considerations, the outlook for the Canadian economy is broadly consistent with that presented in April.
Canada's recession intensified in the first quarter of 2009, in line with the sharp downturn in the global economy.
Real GDP fell by 5.4 per cent (at annual rates), the largest quarterly drop since 1991, and real gross domestic income continued to fall sharply, owing to a further deterioration in the terms of trade.
The first-quarter decline in real GDP was less than had been anticipated in the April Report, reflecting a smaller-than-expected reduction in household spending and weaker imports.
With the exception of government spending, all the major components of aggregate demand fell in the first quarter.
The decline in exports intensified, reflecting the steep drop in US demand and low commodity prices.
While the weakness in exports was quite generalized, exports of automotive products were particularly hard hit, plunging by about 80 per cent (at annual rates) as a result of depressed motor vehicle sales in the United States and the major restructuring under way in the North American auto industry.
Final domestic demand also fell markedly for a second consecutive quarter, as households and firms curtailed spending in response to the decline in domestic income and the high level of uncertainty.
While inventories across all sectors were drawn down in the first quarter, the sharp drop in sales led to a further increase in the stock-to-sales ratio, particularly in the manufacturing and wholesale sectors.
The Canadian economy continued to contract in the second quarter of 2009, although the pace of decline appears to have moderated.
Consumer spending likely picked up, aided by the rebound in confidence and equity prices, resilient wage growth, and an improvement in the terms of trade.
The growth of consumption should nevertheless remain well below trend in the second quarter, owing partly to the past erosion of household wealth and rising unemployment.
The housing sector appears to be reviving, as suggested by the sharp rebound in the resale market, reflecting improvements in consumer confidence and affordability.
Foreign demand for Canadian goods and services remained very weak in the second quarter, however.
Business investment also appears to have fallen further, reflecting uncertainty about the timing and strength of the global recovery and deteriorating cash flows.
In addition, firms face ongoing pressure to reduce inventories further in response to exceptionally high stock-to-sales ratios.
In the April Report, the Bank revised down its estimate of potential output over the 2009-11 period in light of the important structural changes under way in the Canadian economy and the sizable drop in investment.
As a result, the growth of potential output is expected to slow to 1.1 per cent in 2009 and then pick up gradually to 1.5 per cent in 2010 and to 1.9 per cent in 2011.
Excess supply in the Canadian economy increased substantially as the recession deepened.
The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap reached -4.3 per cent in the second quarter of 2009.
In assessing excess capacity, the Bank considers the conventional measure in conjunction with several other indicators, particularly since this measure tends to have a higher margin of error around turning points.
The Bank's summer Business Outlook Survey reports that the percentage of firms that would have difficulty meeting an unanticipated increase in demand remains at an exceptionally low level.
Most labour market indicators mirror the weakness in product markets.
The economy has continued to shed jobs (albeit at a slowing rate), average hours worked have fallen, and the unemployment rate has risen to its highest level in 11 years.
The percentage of firms reporting labour shortages in the Bank's summer survey increased only slightly, after reaching its lowest level in 10 years in the spring survey.
After reviewing all the indicators of capacity pressures and taking into account the weakness in potential output associated with the ongoing restructuring in the Canadian economy, the Bank judges that the economy was operating about 3.5 per cent below its production capacity in the second quarter of 2009.
As expected, total CPI inflation fell sharply in the second quarter.
The 12-month rate of change in total CPI declined from 1.2 per cent in March to -0.3 per cent in June, reflecting the large year-on-year drop in energy prices.
This decline in total CPI inflation was smaller than anticipated in the April Report, however, since core inflation remained roughly unchanged at 1.9 per cent.
This stickiness in core inflation, despite the widening output gap, was associated with resilient wage growth relative to the underlying trend in productivity.
It may also point to a sluggish response of inflation to excess supply.
Nonetheless, the substantial excess supply in the economy is expected to result in lower core inflation over the next few quarters.
Measures of near-term inflation expectations have risen somewhat from very low levels in recent months, reflecting increases in commodity prices as well as improved market sentiment and consumer confidence.
The latest Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation is 0.4 per cent for 2009.
The forecasts for 2010 and beyond remain close to the 2 per cent inflation target.
The Bank's most recent Business Outlook Survey also showed inflation expectations increasingly concentrated within the Bank's inflation-control range.
Financial conditions in Canada have improved since the April Report, in line with recent global developments.
Equities have rebounded, spreads on Canadian corporate bonds have declined significantly, and corporate bond issuance has picked up.
Financial conditions in Canada continue to be more favourable than in other advanced economies, as has been the case throughout the financial crisis.
Funding costs for Canadian banks remain low.
Borrowing costs for households are also low, although they have recently increased modestly as a result of rising rates on longer-term fixed mortgages.
In contrast, borrowing costs for Canadian businesses have continued to fall in recent months, with firms benefiting from the recent sharp reduction in spreads.
The effective average interest rate on business borrowing has declined by about 65 basis points since the April Report, despite somewhat higher yields on government bonds.
However, respondents in the Bank's latest Senior Loan officer Survey and Business Outlook Survey reported that the pricing and availability of business credit tightened further in the second quarter.
Nonetheless, the tightening was less generalized and more industry-specific than in previous quarters.
Overall, low borrowing costs for households and falling borrowing costs for businesses should help to revive interest-sensitive spending and support the economic recovery.
One indication of the improvement in Canadian financial conditions is the significant increase in the Bank's financial conditions index since April.
Indeed, the level of the FCI is now slightly above its 10-year average.
The index reflects the exceptionally low level of the policy rate, which is offsetting higher-than-normal spreads on corporate bonds and tightening in lending standards.
Household credit continues to grow at a pace near its average since 1992 and has picked up in recent months.
This strength seems to be linked to an increased demand for mortgage credit, related to the recent rebound in the resale housing market.
There was some shift towards market sources of credit, in line with the recent stabilization of financial markets.
Monetary aggregates have continued to grow strongly, despite declining nominal GDP growth.
In the three months to May, the narrow aggregate M1+ grew at an annual rate of 14.4 per cent, while M2++ grew by 7.6 per cent.
It is difficult to draw the implications of monetary expansion for economic activity, since the demand for money is likely to be abnormally high and more variable in an environment of very low interest rates and tight credit conditions.
It is encouraging, however, that money supply has increased to meet higher demand.
The previous portfolio shifts into more-liquid assets should begin to reverse with an improving economic outlook and the normalization of credit conditions.
The Canadian dollar has strengthened since the April Report, trading in a range of roughly 81 to 92 cents US and averaging about 87 cents US.
The appreciation of the Canadian dollar reflects two broad developments.
The first is rising commodity prices, which have caused similar appreciations of other commodity currencies since April.
Second is the generalized weakening of the US dollar against all major currencies in the second quarter of 2009.
Canadian monetary and fiscal policies have eased considerably since the onset of the economic downturn.
In April 2009, the Bank of Canada lowered its target for the overnight interest rate to 1/4 per cent - the effective lower bound for this target rate - and made a commitment, conditional on the inflation outlook, to keep the policy interest rate at that level until the end of the second quarter of 2010.
The Bank also explained the principles that would guide any action to provide further monetary stimulus, if needed, at the effective lower bound.
On 4 June and 21 July, the Bank maintained the target overnight rate at 1/4 per cent and reaffirmed its conditional commitment to hold the policy rate at that level until the end of the second quarter of 2010.
The Bank's base-case projection incorporates the following key assumptions: a Canada/US exchange rate averaging 87 cents US; energy prices in line with recent futures prices; prices for non-energy commodities increasing progressively as the global economy recovers; and global credit conditions remaining tight through early 2010, before improving gradually.
The Bank's base-case projection now sees growth in the Canadian economy resuming in the third quarter of 2009, one quarter earlier than anticipated in the April Report.
This somewhat more favourable short-term outlook reflects a more modest retrenchment in household and business spending, as negative effects on confidence dissipate, financial market conditions improve, and the terms of trade increase more quickly than previously anticipated.
The medium-term outlook for growth is broadly consistent with that in the April Report.
However, growth is projected to be stronger through to mid-2010 and then weaker over the rest of the projection horizon.
On an annual average basis, the economy is projected to contract by 2.3 per cent this year, and to grow by 3.0 per cent in 2010 and by 3.5 per cent in 2011.
Despite the upward revision to their spending profile in 2009 and 2010, households are expected to remain cautious in light of the continued weakness in labour markets and the erosion in household wealth from past declines in equity and house prices.
As a result, the personal savings rate is expected to remain elevated over the projection horizon, at or above its average since the mid-1990s.
This adjustment returns the share of consumer spending in nominal GDP to its long-run average.
This share has been relatively stable in Canada, in contrast to the situation in the United States, where it has risen substantially.
The stimulus coming from monetary and fiscal policies should help to support household spending over the projection horizon.
Business fixed investment is expected to contract sharply in 2009, reflecting the ongoing and substantial drop in corporate profits, tight credit conditions, the high level of uncertainty, and excess production capacity.
Firms are also expected to draw down their inventories, and this is projected to subtract significantly from GDP growth in 2009.
The improvement in financial conditions and economic activity, as well as higher commodity prices, should help boost business spending in 2010.
Export volumes are expected to recover over the projection period in response to the improvement in external demand - partly reflecting a pickup in motor vehicle production in North America (from the very low levels in 2009) and a rebound in US housing activity - as well as higher commodity prices.
Canadian exporters will benefit disproportionately from the US recovery in 2010-11, since the projected growth in the Bank's US activity index is higher than the expected growth in US real GDP over this period.
Import volumes are also projected to pick up, starting in the second half of 2009, in line with the anticipated economic recovery and the recent appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
As economic activity begins to improve, excess supply will gradually be absorbed, and the economy is expected to reach production capacity in the middle of 2011.
Core inflation is expected to decline to a trough of 1.4 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2009, reflecting the significant excess supply in the Canadian economy and a continued deceleration in food prices.
This is higher than expected in the April Report, owing mainly to the smaller output gap.
With excess supply being absorbed gradually, and with inflation expectations well anchored, core inflation is projected to return to 2 per cent in the second quarter of 2011.
Total CPI inflation is expected to continue to fall in the third quarter of 2009, reaching a trough of -0.7 per cent, before returning to the Bank's 2 per cent target in the second quarter of 2011.
Chart 21 and Chart 22 show the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core and total CPI inflation from the third quarter of 2009 to the end of 2011 they show, in particular, the slight downward tilt to the confidence bands that results from monetary policy operating at the effective lower bound.
Although the vigorous policy actions taken by monetary and fiscal authorities around the world appear to have reduced the probability of an extreme negative outcome for the global economy, and recent developments provide encouraging signs of a potential upturn in global and Canadian economic activity, significant upside and downside risks remain to the Bank's inflation projection for Canada.
The main upside risks to inflation relate to domestic factors, and the possibility that the momentum in economic activity will be stronger and more sustained than currently anticipated.
Another upside risk to inflation is the possibility that potential output will be lower than the Bank's revised estimate, if the extensive restructuring in certain sectors is more protracted and the investment response more delayed than currently envisaged.
The restoration of normal financial conditions could be more gradual than expected and further setbacks cannot be precluded-triggered, for example, by unexpected losses at financial institutions or by escalating concerns about current account and budgetary imbalances.
Recent indicators point to the start of a global recovery from a deep, synchronous recession.
Global economic and financial developments have been somewhat more favourable than expected at the time of the July Report, although significant fragilities remain.
This resumption of growth is supported by monetary and fiscal stimulus, increased household wealth, improving financial conditions, higher commodity prices, and stronger business and consumer confidence.
However, heightened volatility and persistent strength in the Canadian dollar are working to slow growth and subdue inflation pressures.
The current strength in the dollar is expected, over time, to more than fully offset the favourable developments since July.
Given all of these factors, the Bank now projects that, relative to the July Report, the composition of aggregate demand will shift further towards final domestic demand and away from net exports.
Growth is expected to be slightly higher in the second half of this year than previously projected but to average slightly lower over the balance of the projection period.
The Canadian economy is projected to grow by 3.0 per cent in 2010 and 3.3 per cent in 2011, after contracting by 2.4 per cent this year.
This is a somewhat more modest recovery in Canada than the average of previous economic cycles.
The Bank now expects that the output gap will be closed in the third quarter of 2011, one quarter later than it had projected in July.
Correspondingly, inflation is also expected to return to the 2 per cent target in the third quarter of 2011, one quarter later than in July's projection.
The risks to the outlook remain elevated, although they have diminished somewhat since the July Report, with accumulating evidence of a recovery in the global and Canadian economies.
A stronger global recovery would be transmitted to Canada via trade, financial, confidence, and commodity-price channels.
There is also the risk that Canadian domestic demand could be more robust and have a more sustained momentum than projected.
On the downside, a stronger-than-assumed Canadian dollar, driven by global portfolio movements out of US-dollar assets, could act as a significant further drag on growth and put additional downward pressure on inflation.
Another important downside risk is that the global recovery could be even more protracted than projected if self-sustaining growth in private demand, which will be required for a solid recovery, takes longer than expected to materialize.
On 10 September and 20 October, the Bank reaffirmed its conditional commitment to maintain its target for the overnight rate at its current level of 1/4 per cent until the end of the second quarter of 2010 in order to achieve the inflation target.
In its conduct of monetary policy at low interest rates, the Bank retains considerable flexibility, consistent with the framework outlined in the April Report.
Recent indicators point to the start of a global recovery, following a deep, synchronous global recession.
Economic and financial developments have been somewhat more favourable than expected at the time of the July Monetary Policy Report, although significant fragilities remain.
Vigorous and coordinated fiscal and monetary policy stimulus in the G-20 economies, including a wide range of measures to support the flow of credit, have been sustaining aggregate demand, but evidence of self-sustaining private demand remains modest.
Necessary adjustments on both the real and financial sides of the global economy are under way, and will involve a significant and protracted rotation of global demand, as well as deleveraging by US and European banks, households, and firms.
Led primarily by Asian economies, the turnaround in global output began in the second quarter, slightly earlier than anticipated.
In the euro area and North American economies, real GDP declined further in the second quarter, as expected, although at a much slower pace than in preceding quarters.
More recent monthly data suggest that global output picked up in the third quarter, partly reflecting the impact of the temporary fiscal measures that have been adopted in most major economies, as well as a short-term boost to growth from a turn in the inventory cycle.
In the United States, annual comprehensive revisions to the national accounts show that, through the first quarter of 2009, the recession was even deeper than previously estimated.
However, as expected, real GDP declined at a much slower pace in the second quarter of 2009.
Despite sizable fiscal stimulus, final domestic demand continued to fall, with additional reductions in household consumption and further large declines in private fixed investment.
De-stocking also continued during the second quarter.
More recent indicators, such as an improvement in consumer confidence and a rise in new manufacturing orders, point to a rebound in aggregate real economic activity in the third quarter.
However, this rebound appears to be related largely to a turn in the inventory cycle and to the temporary support provided by government stimulus programs.
The US government's Car Allowance Rebate System , which ended in late August, provided a major boost to auto sales and production during the third quarter.
At the same time, aided partly by the government's tax credit program for first-time homebuyers, the housing sector appears to have bottomed out, and some firming in house prices is evident.
Real economic activity in major overseas countries was stronger than expected, with France, Germany, and Japan all recording positive growth in the second quarter.
Growth in the euro area as a whole contracted slightly, but still exceeded expectations.
The combination of inventory adjustments that appear to be well advanced, relatively strong data for new orders in the manufacturing sector, more positive surveys for the services sector, and a general improvement in household and business confidence suggests that the euro area economy troughed in the second quarter.
Growth in Japan was supported by government cash transfers to low-income households and tax rebates on energy-efficient vehicles and home appliances.
A rebound in exports of automobiles and electronics from a very weak level also contributed to stronger real GDP growth.
Economic growth in China in the second quarter was also stronger than anticipated, reflecting the impact of massive fiscal stimulus concentrated in infrastructure projects and incentives for consumer spending.
Rapid credit expansion has also fuelled a sharp pickup in consumption and investment.
In the rest of the world, following a larger-than-anticipated contraction in the first quarter, available data suggest that growth resumed in the second quarter.
There are considerable disparities across regions, however, with emerging economies in Asia rebounding the most strongly, aided by the strength in China and by supportive macroeconomic policies.
World oil prices and, to a lesser extent, non-energy commodity prices (particularly metals) have firmed since their trough in the first quarter, but nonetheless remain well below the levels reached in mid-2008.
A strong increase in demand from China, associated with large, commodity-intensive infrastructure projects and some accumulation for investment purposes, has been a key contributor to the recent rise in commodity prices.
The improved outlook for demand and the reduction in financing costs have provided greater incentives for companies to build inventories.
These factors, together with supply cuts by OPEC, have also helped boost world oil prices.
In contrast to developments in the oil sector, natural gas prices have remained relatively low because of the considerable excess supply in the North American market, stemming mainly from a shift in US production towards unconventional sources (shale gas).
As expected, total consumer price inflation has fallen sharply around the world since mid-2008, reflecting the sizable decline in oil and other commodity prices through early 2009.
Indeed, annual rates of total inflation in most advanced economies are now below zero.
The emergence of excess supply has also dampened underlying inflation rates.
This downward pressure on core inflation has been mitigated in many economies, however, by the aggressive monetary policy actions taken early in the crisis, which have helped to anchor long-term inflation expectations, and also by price and wage rigidities, particularly in the services sector.
Conditions in global financial markets have improved substantially and somewhat more rapidly than anticipated in recent months, consistent with the view that the global recession has bottomed out and that the probability of an extreme negative outcome has receded.
These improvements, if sustained, will help repair household and business balance sheets and boost confidence, supporting growth in the real economy.
Nevertheless, strains remain in certain markets, and further setbacks are possible.
Although signs of recovery are apparent, securitization markets are still operating at a fraction of their pre-crisis levels and credit conditions at banks are still relatively tight, owing to ongoing deleveraging.
While recent increases in asset prices are helping, the deterioration in loan quality associated with the economic downturn is likely to prolong the deleveraging process.
Stimulative monetary policies and direct interventions in specific markets have remained an important source of support.
Funding markets for financial institutions have been normalizing, with interest rate levels reaching record lows, and spreads in short-term funding markets falling below pre-Lehman levels.
As a result, recourse to central bank facilities has diminished considerably, and a number of central banks have begun to reduce some of their extraordinary liquidity programs.
Increasingly, large financial institutions have also been able to access the market for longer-term financing without direct government guarantees.
Financing conditions for businesses have improved as well.
For both financial and non-financial issuers, credit spreads are down substantially from their peaks, although they remain elevated relative to their historical averages.
With the yields on benchmark government bonds remaining relatively low, overall corporate yields are now well below the levels that prevailed earlier this year.
Improved market access has contributed to a record amount of global long-term corporate bond issuance since the beginning of the year.
In addition, global equity markets have registered strong gains since the troughs reached in March.
Despite these marked improvements in global financial markets, bank lending conditions for households remain relatively tight outside of Canada.
Banks in the euro area and the United States continue to restrict access to credit for most types of loans, although surveys of senior loan officers show that the pace of credit tightening is slowing.
The combination of tighter credit conditions and depressed demand have halted growth in household credit in the euro area and produced outright contractions in the United States.
While policy interventions have helped to stabilize global financial markets and to improve credit conditions, additional comprehensive and timely actions will be needed to put the recovery on a firm footing and reduce the probability of future crises.
However, considerable uncertainty still surrounds the global outlook.
The recovery is expected to be more gradual than usual.
This is because underlying private demand in many economies is expected to recover only slowly as significant balance-sheet and structural adjustments run their course.
Experience shows that recessions precipitated by financial crises have larger and longer-lasting adverse effects on potential output than do other types of recessions.
The significant rotation in global demand that will be required to put growth on a sustainable path will make the adjustment process especially challenging.
Our estimates suggest that the growth of global production potential will slow from over 4 per cent in the years just prior to the crisis to about 3 per cent during the 2009-11 period.
In that context, the Bank now expects the global economy to shrink by 1.6 per cent in 2009, followed by growth of 3.1 per cent in 2010 and 4.0 per cent in 2011.
The gradual recovery is underpinned by the same factors highlighted in our previous projections.
First, the fiscal and monetary stimulus in place should continue to support domestic demand.
Part of this has already come through the effects of lower interest rates and rising asset prices on wealth.
Second, a further gradual normalization of financial markets and the completion of deleveraging in the financial sector should result in increased availability of credit to businesses and households.
Third, the turn in the inventory cycle and the completion of stock adjustment in the housing sectors of several economies should contribute positively to overall growth.
With the level of world aggregate demand expected to recover only gradually, significant excess capacity in the global economy should persist over the projection horizon, contributing to a subdued inflation profile.
In the United States, the pace of the recovery starting in the third quarter of 2009 is projected to be somewhat faster than in the July Report, since some of the ongoing adjustments in the economy appear to be more advanced than previously assumed.
Fiscal stimulus, together with a positive boost from inventories, should be key contributors to the recovery.
The rebound in consumption expenditures is projected to be more moderate than in previous cycles, however, largely reflecting the need for households to rebuild savings following the sharp decline in their wealth.
This adjustment brings the share of consumer spending in GDP over the projection horizon closer to its long-run average.
Consumption will also be restrained by continued weakness in disposable income as labour market conditions deteriorate further over the coming quarters, and by credit conditions that remain relatively tight.
A gradual recovery in residential investment is expected to have begun in the second half of 2009, somewhat earlier than anticipated, because of the impact on home sales of the tax credit for first-time homebuyers and more favourable levels of housing inventory.
Overall, US growth is still expected to be muted, with real GDP now expected to decline by 2.5 per cent in 2009, and to grow by 1.8 per cent in 2010 and by 3.8 per cent in 2011.
In the euro area, the rebound in the second half of 2009 and in 2010 is also projected to be somewhat stronger than in July, reflecting a larger impact from the fiscal stimulus than previously assumed.
The recovery should, nonetheless, be more subdued than in the United States, partly because of less-aggressive policy actions and the greater adjustments still needed in the euro area's banking system.
The recovery in household consumption will likely be restrained by the deterioration in labour markets and relatively tight credit conditions.
In Japan, the recovery is supported by the completion of the inventory correction and ongoing monetary and fiscal stimulus.
Economic growth in China is expected to remain robust, supported by highly accommodative monetary and fiscal policies.
Bank credit has been growing at an extraordinarily rapid rate, creating the possibility of some resource misallocation.
Smaller emerging economies in Asia have already started to recover from a sharp downturn in industrial production and exports, and should continue to benefit from a pickup in global trade and the solid expansion in China.
Other developing and emerging-market economies are expected to recover gradually over the coming years, aided by a resumption of capital flows and expansionary fiscal and monetary policies.
The growing contribution of developing and emerging-market economies to global demand should provide further support to commodity prices.
Following three consecutive quarters of sharp contraction, economic growth has resumed in Canada.
This recovery is supported by monetary and fiscal stimulus, increased household wealth, improving financial conditions, stronger business and consumer confidence, the beginning of the recovery in the global economy, and a strengthening in the terms of trade.
The Bank's base-case projection now sees slightly stronger growth in the second half of 2009 than was projected in the July Report.
Over the balance of the projection period, growth is slightly lower, reflecting the effect of the higher value of the Canadian dollar.
The economy is now projected to return to full capacity in the third quarter of 2011, one quarter later than anticipated in July.
As expected, the recession in Canada deepened significantly in the second quarter, with real GDP falling by an additional 3.4 per cent (at annual rates), in line with the July projection.
Real gross domestic income also declined further, but at a much slower pace than in the previous two quarters, owing to a partial rebound in Canada's terms of trade.
Exports continued to plunge, consistent with the steep drop in US demand, while businesses further curtailed employment and fixed investments.
The drop in exports, following an exceptionally large contraction in the first quarter, marks the eighth consecutive quarterly decline.
While the weakness was generalized, exports of machinery and equipment and natural gas posted particularly large declines.
The sharp fall in business investment reflected uncertainty about the timing and strength of the global recovery, substantial excess capacity, and deteriorating profits.
Although firms drew down inventories at a slightly faster pace, sales fell even more rapidly, causing the stock-to-sales ratio to increase further.
In contrast, household spending began to recover in the second quarter in response to substantial monetary and fiscal stimulus and improved consumer confidence.
In addition to improved affordability, the sharp rebound in sales of existing homes reflected pent-up demand from the height of the financial crisis.
Government expenditures were another important source of demand, contributing 1.2 percentage points to growth (at annual rates) in the quarter.
Available indicators, including the recent pickup in employment, suggest that real GDP growth resumed in the third quarter.
Household spending continued to recover, and the contribution of government expenditures increased.
Growth was also boosted by a substantial rise in Canadian automobile production, as major auto companies reopened some of the capacity they had shuttered earlier this year and as inventories that were drawn down as a result of the US CARS program were rebuilt.
These factors should lead to a temporary surge in automotive exports.
Recent data suggest, however, that imports increased even more sharply in the quarter, so that the trade balance continued to subtract from growth.
Business investment is also expected to have fallen further, given ongoing uncertainty about the strength of the global recovery.
Firms are expected to have continued drawing down inventories, although by a lesser amount than in the second quarter.
Coupled with the pickup in sales, these developments should lead to a decline in the stock-to-sales ratio.
In the April Report, the Bank revised down its estimate of potential output growth over the 2009-11 period, owing to the important structural changes under way in the Canadian economy and the sizable drop in investment.
The growth of potential output is expected to trough at 1.2 per cent in 2009, and then to gradually pick up to 1.5 per cent in 2010 and 1.9 per cent in 2011.
It is important to note that considerable uncertainty surrounds estimates of potential output, especially when the economy is coming out of a deep recession.
There continued to be a substantial amount of excess supply in the Canadian economy in the third quarter.
In assessing excess capacity, the Bank considers its conventional measure in conjunction with several other indicators, particularly since this measure tends to have a high margin of error around turning points.
The Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey reported that the percentage of firms that would have difficulty meeting an unanticipated increase in demand fell to its lowest level since the series began in 1999.
Recent indicators suggest that the labour market may have stopped deteriorating, consistent with excess supply reaching its peak level.
Weakness in the private sector labour market is nonetheless evident in the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey, in which the percentage of firms reporting labour shortages remained largely unchanged at a very low level.
As well, wage growth - as measured by average hourly earnings of permanent workers - has recently decelerated.
After reviewing all the indicators of capacity pressures and taking into account the weakness in potential output associated with the ongoing restructuring in the Canadian economy, the Bank judges that the economy was operating about 3 1/2 per cent below its production capacity in the third quarter of 2009, in line with the July projection.
Total CPI inflation continued to decline in the third quarter of 2009, as anticipated in the July Report.
The 12-month rate of change in total CPI troughed at -0.9 per cent in the quarter, as a result of large year-over-year declines in energy prices.
Core inflation fell from 1.9 per cent in June to 1.5 per cent in September, owing to the substantial excess supply in the economy and the continued deceleration in core food price inflation.
Near-term inflation expectations remain at very low levels, in line with past movements in energy prices.
The latest Consensus Economics forecasts for 2010 and beyond remain close to the 2 per cent inflation target.
The Bank's most recent Business Outlook Survey also showed that inflation expectations are concentrated within the Bank's inflation-control target range.
Canada's overall financial conditions continue to improve and to be more favourable than those in most other advanced economies.
This improvement has been fairly broad based, as equity markets have continued to rally, credit spreads have narrowed further, and corporate bond issuance has remained strong.
In particular, funding costs for Canadian banks remain at very low levels.
Household borrowing costs are also very low by historical standards.
The strength in household credit is linked to the rebound in the housing market and the pickup in renovation activity.
In contrast to household credit, business credit has been very weak recently, registering a modest decline in the three months to August.
This sluggishness in business credit mainly reflects the weak outlook for business investment, although the availability of credit has likely also played a role.
For larger corporations, the situation has improved over the past few months, as indicated, for instance, by the strong issuance activity in the Canadian corporate bond market.
Borrowing costs for Canadian businesses have fallen further in recent months.
The effective average interest rate on business borrowing has declined by about 15 basis points since the July Report, mainly as a result of the drop in corporate bond rates.
Taken together, results from the Bank's latest Senior Loan officer Survey and the Business Outlook Survey indicate that credit conditions for businesses were little changed in the third quarter, following a period of substantial tightening.
The Bank's financial conditions index has continued to improve since the July Report and is now well above its 10-year average.
The level of the FCI reflects the exceptionally low level of the Bank's policy rate, which is offsetting spreads on corporate bonds that are still above the average for the decade, despite their recent compression.
It is worth noting that because the exchange rate enters the FCI with a lag, it is not yet capturing the appreciation of the Canadian dollar since the spring.
As well, the FCI assigns a very low weight to the SLOS measure of overall business-lending conditions.
For these reasons, the Bank judges that the FCI currently overstates the improvement in financial conditions.
In the three months to August, the narrow aggregate M1+ grew at an annual rate of 18.2 per cent, while M2++ grew by 7.0 per cent.
It is difficult to assess the implications of monetary expansion for economic activity, since the demand for money is likely to be abnormally high in an environment of very low interest rates and tight credit conditions.
The continued robust growth in narrow money reflects the desire of both households and firms to keep money in liquid assets until it is clear that the economic recovery is taking hold.
Consistent with our base-case projection, the growth in money balances is expected to gradually decline over time.
The Canadian dollar remained relatively stable from July to early October, trading in a range of 90 to 94 cents US.
More recently, however, it has appreciated sharply, averaging about 96 cents US in the past 10 days, much higher than the 87 cents US assumed at the time of the July Report.
While higher commodity prices have been supportive, movements in the Canadian dollar over the period appear to have been increasingly driven by a broader depreciation of the US dollar against most major currencies.
Monetary policy in Canada has continued to be exceptionally stimulative.
On 10 September and 20 October, the Bank of Canada maintained its target for the overnight interest rate at 1/4 per cent - the effective lower bound for this rate - and reaffirmed its commitment, conditional on the inflation outlook, to hold the policy rate at that level until the end of the second quarter of 2010.
Overall, the outlook for Canadian GDP growth is similar to that presented in the July Report.
The Bank now projects that growth will be slightly stronger in the second half of 2009 than expected in July.
On an average annual basis, the economy is projected to contract by 2.4 per cent this year and to grow by 3.0 per cent in 2010 and 3.3 per cent in 2011, slightly weaker than expected in July.
The recovery of the Canadian economy is expected to be supported by a number of domestic factors-notably, the substantial amount of monetary and fiscal stimulus, the recent increase in household wealth, and our well-functioning financial system.
It also hinges on the resumption of growth in the global economy and the associated firming of commodity prices, which will provide support to both domestic demand and exports.
However, the high value of the Canadian dollar will act as a drag on demand for Canadian products.
Overall, the recovery in Canada is projected to be somewhat more modest than the average of previous cycles.
Consumer spending is expected to grow at a solid pace throughout the projection horizon.
In the near term, improvements in wealth and in consumer confidence, as well as the re-emergence of demand postponed from previous quarters, will help to fuel spending.
As these effects diminish, growth in consumer spending should be supported by the recovery in the growth of labour income.
Growth in housing investment is projected to be brisk until early 2010, and then to slow down as the effects of temporary factors - such as pent-up demand and the home renovation tax credit - subside and affordability declines.
In the wake of a short, severe recession, and with residual economic uncertainty, the personal savings rate remains elevated over the projection horizon.
Business fixed investment is projected to recover in early 2010, following five quarters of contraction.
As in past cycles, growth in business investment is expected to lag the recovery, given the large amount of unused capacity, and then to rebound strongly once the recovery is well under way.
The gradual improvement in financial conditions and economic activity, as well as higher commodity prices, should help to boost business spending.
In light of recent information, firms are now expected to draw down their inventories at a slower pace than in July.
As detailed in the July Report, Canadian exporters should benefit disproportionately from the US recovery in 2010-11, since the projected growth in the Bank's US activity index is considerably higher than that in US real GDP over this period.
The higher Canadian dollar will, however, dampen the expansion of exports.
Import volumes are projected to increase at a solid pace, in line with the recovery in the domestic economy, the rebound in exports, and the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
As growth in the Canadian economy resumes, excess supply will gradually be absorbed, and the economy is expected to reach its production capacity in the third quarter of 2011.
Inflation pressures in Canada are expected to be slightly more subdued, compared with the July Report, with inflation returning to the Bank's target one quarter later than anticipated in July.
The core rate of inflation is projected to decline, reaching a trough of 1.4 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2009, owing to the substantial excess supply that has emerged in the economy, together with a noticeable deceleration in the growth of core food prices.
With excess supply gradually absorbed, and with inflation expectations well anchored, the core rate is projected to return to 2 per cent in the third quarter of 2011.
As noted earlier, total CPI inflation has fallen much more rapidly than the core rate, to -0.9 per cent in the third quarter of 2009, reflecting large year-over-year drops in energy prices.
With the base-year effects for gasoline prices dropping out of the data, this is expected to be the trough for total CPI inflation, which should quickly rise to 1.0 per cent in the fourth quarter.
In line with developments in the core inflation rate, total CPI inflation is also expected to return to the Bank's 2 per cent target in the third quarter of 2011.
Chart 23 and Chart 24 depict the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core and total CPI inflation from the fourth quarter of 2009 to the end of 2011.
In particular, they show the slight downward tilt to the confidence bands that results from monetary policy operating at the effective lower bound.
It is possible, however, that the global recovery will be more vigorous than expected - in view of the extraordinary degree of monetary and fiscal stimulus in most advanced countries and in line with the historical tendency for a steeper downturn to be followed by a steeper recovery.
In particular, Canadian households may increase their spending on consumption and residential investment more strongly than projected as the recovery takes hold.
Both globally and in Canada, wealth effects stemming from sustained improvements in financial conditions may add increased impetus to the recovery.
Another important downside risk to the inflation outlook is that the global recovery could be even more protracted than projected.
Up to this point, the recovery has been supported by aggressive monetary and fiscal stimulus across all G-20 countries.
Self-sustaining growth in private demand, which will be required for a solid recovery, may take longer than expected to materialize.
While the Bank judges that these underlying macroeconomic risks to the projection are roughly balanced, the overall risks to the inflation projection are tilted slightly to the downside as a result of monetary policy operating at the effective lower bound.
The reason for this tilt is that the Bank could respond with conventional monetary tightening in the event that upside risks materialized.
In contrast, if downside risks materialized, the Bank would have to implement unconventional policies, for which greater prudence would be warranted.
Current account imbalances have been attenuated during the recession, as US households have curtailed their spending, while in China, the stimulus package has boosted domestic demand.
However, in the absence of policies to bring about a sustained rotation of global demand, these imbalances may widen again with the recovery, carrying the risk of disorderly adjustments.
The global economic recovery is under way, supported by continued improvements in financial conditions and stronger domestic demand growth in many emerging-market economies.
While the outlook for global growth through 2010 and 2011 is somewhat stronger than the Bank had projected in its October Monetary Policy Report, the recovery continues to depend on exceptional monetary and fiscal stimulus, as well as extraordinary measures taken to support financial systems.
Total CPI inflation turned positive in the fourth quarter and the core rate of inflation has been slightly higher than expected in recent months.
Nevertheless, considerable excess supply remains, and the Bank judges that the economy was operating about 3 1/4 per cent below its production capacity in the fourth quarter of 2009.
Canada's economic recovery is expected to evolve largely as anticipated in the October Report, with the economy returning to full capacity and inflation to the 2 per cent target in the third quarter of 2011.
The Bank projects that the economy will grow by 2.9 per cent in 2010 and 3.5 per cent in 2011, after contracting by 2.5 per cent in 2009.
The factors shaping the recovery are largely unchanged - policy support, increased confidence, improving financial conditions, global growth, and higher terms of trade.
At the same time, the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar and the low absolute level of US demand continue to act as significant drags on economic activity in Canada.
The private sector should become the sole driver of domestic demand growth in 2011.
Risks remain elevated, although they have continued to diminish gradually with the consolidation of the recovery in the global and Canadian economies.
The main upside risks to inflation are associated with the possibility of a stronger-than-anticipated global recovery.
It is possible that the recovery in global demand could be more vigorous than projected, resulting in stronger external demand for Canadian exports.
A related risk is that Canadian domestic demand could be more robust than projected.
On the downside, there is the risk that persistent strength of the Canadian dollar could act as a significant further drag on growth and put additional downward pressure on inflation.
Another important downside risk is that the global recovery could be even more protracted than projected.
While the Bank judges that these underlying macroeconomic risks are roughly balanced, the overall risks to the inflation projection are tilted slightly to the downside as a result of monetary policy operating at the effective lower bound.
On 8 December 2009 and 19 January 2010, the Bank reaffirmed its conditional commitment to maintain its target for the overnight rate at its current level of 1/4 per cent until the end of the second quarter of 2010 in order to achieve the inflation target.
In its conduct of monetary policy at low interest rates, the Bank retains considerable flexibility, consistent with the framework outlined in the April 2009 Monetary Policy Report.
Global economic and financial developments have been slightly more favourable than projected in the October Monetary Policy Report, and the outlook for global economic growth through 2010 and 2011 is somewhat stronger.
Nonetheless, the recovery is still expected to be more subdued than usual.
Growth is heavily dependent on the exceptional monetary and fiscal policy stimulus provided worldwide, as well as the extraordinary measures taken to support financial systems in many advanced countries.
The turnaround in global economic activity, which began in the second quarter of 2009, continues to strengthen, in line with the growth projections in the October Report.
While unemployment rates remain high in most major advanced countries, there are signs that the pace of deterioration in labour market conditions has started to ease.
Purchasing manager indexes have been rising in all major regions and are now at levels that are consistent with economic expansion.
Large output gaps and the absence of wage pressure have kept underlying inflation in the major economies subdued.
Headline inflation rates have nonetheless rebounded, since sharp declines in energy prices from 2008 are no longer holding down measured inflation.
Monetary authorities in advanced economies continue to provide strong support for the recovery, and this has resulted in progressive improvements in financial conditions.
In addition, government initiatives to arrest the economic decline and prime the recovery appear to have been better targeted and more effective than anticipated.
A number of sectors, most notably automotive and housing, have benefited from these programs.
Larger-than-expected improvements in financial wealth have supported consumption, and stronger growth in the rest of the world, primarily in emerging Asia, helped to boost exports.
The Bank estimates that US growth in the fourth quarter rose to 4.6 per cent, driven principally by an important contribution from inventories, continued robust growth in exports, and steady increases in residential construction.
Motor-vehicle production is also estimated to have risen more quickly than previously anticipated.
While GDP growth in the Euro area, at 1.7 per cent, came in slightly weaker than expected in the third quarter, indicators suggest that the recovery is becoming more firmly entrenched.
The three largest economies - Germany, France, and Italy - all reported an upturn in industrial production for the first time since the first quarter of 2008.
While the recovery is still tentative in Japan, business confidence and corporate profits, supported by strong export demand, have improved recently.
China's third-quarter GDP release reported year-over-year growth of 8.9 per cent, underpinned by strong sales of durable goods, increased investment in housing, and rising exports, as the effects of the large fiscal stimulus and accommodative monetary and credit policies continue to be felt.
Emerging concerns about possible overheating in China have prompted authorities to tighten credit conditions slightly to mitigate inflationary pressures.
The Bank's index of commodity prices rose moderately from its level at the time of the October Report, as natural gas prices firmed and non-energy commodity prices rose in response to greater-than-expected demand from emerging Asia.
Financial conditions in advanced economies have improved and are contributing to the emerging global recovery.
Equity markets have recovered substantially over the past three quarters, and firms have enjoyed greater access to capital markets, with global corporate bond issuance reaching record levels.
Borrowing costs also remain low as credit spreads continue to decline.
Underpinning all of these improvements are the historically low official interest rates maintained by all major countries.
Mortgage rates remain close to record lows in the United States, aided by targeted central bank purchases.
Improvements in the non-conforming mortgage market have been more modest, however, and securitized markets remain impaired, with public sector measures continuing to provide important support.
Despite the narrowing in spreads and generally low interest rates observed in many countries, lending to households and businesses, especially small and medium-sized enterprises, remains restricted, reflecting the effect of past and prospective loan losses on banks' capital, as well as uncertainty about the impact of regulatory reforms on required bank capital and liquidity.
Yields on long-term government bonds have risen since the last Report, reflecting a more positive economic outlook.
Indeed, some countries have started to raise interest rates and withdraw unconventional measures in anticipation of stronger growth and emerging price pressures.
Recent events have also focused market attention on the potential sovereign credit risk associated with mounting debt levels in a number of countries.
Recent indicators point to a more favourable outlook for global economic growth in 2010 than previously anticipated.
The Bank now expects the world economy to grow at a rate of 3.7 per cent in 2010 and 4.1 per cent in 2011.
While sustained, the projected recovery is relatively gradual, considering the depth of the recession.
The revisions to the outlook for 2010 reflect further improvements in global financial conditions, stronger growth in emerging Asia, and additional fiscal programs to support domestic demand in advanced economies.
The growth of private sector demand in advanced countries is nevertheless expected to remain relatively weak, as households repair their balance sheets, businesses restructure, temporary fiscal incentives come to an end, and financial intermediaries continue to pursue conservative lending strategies in an effort to rebuild capital.
In the United States, growth in 2010 and 2011 is projected to be slightly higher than previously expected, owing to stronger-than-expected growth in consumption and exports, as well as additional fiscal measures.
Nonetheless, the recovery of domestic demand in 2010 is still expected to be relatively weak, with much of the anticipated growth attributable to past and ongoing fiscal and monetary stimulus.
Growth in consumer spending will be weaker than in past recoveries, since households still need to rebuild their wealth and may face limited access to credit.
The household savings rate is expected to rise to over 6 per cent in the next two years (from a low of 1.2 per cent in the first quarter of 2008).
The growth of business investment in commercial real estate will likely remain weak, owing to rising vacancies and falling property prices.
Exports are expected to grow substantially, supported by a weaker US dollar and a faster-than-anticipated recovery in overseas economies.
Higher productivity growth and lower unit labour costs have also made US goods more competitive.
Net exports are not expected to make a positive contribution to GDP growth until the second half of 2010, however, because imports will also rebound sharply as domestic demand recovers.
Economic growth in the Euro area is projected to be somewhat stronger in 2010 than previously expected, supported by increased export growth and a modest improvement in the outlook for labour markets.
Consumer confidence has also improved, and proposed tax cuts in Germany could provide some additional support in the near term.
However, concerns about future fiscal tightening in the Euro area and possible limitations on the availability of bank credit could dampen growth in subsequent periods.
Growth in Japan is being sustained by expansionary monetary and fiscal policies and by strong Asian demand for Japanese products, but is expected to remain modest through 2010-11, given high unemployment and weak wage growth.
In addition, business investment is likely to be constrained by high excess capacity.
The Chinese economy is expected to grow by more than 9 per cent in each of the next two years, with an expanding share of private investment and consumption, and less reliance on government subsidies, public investment, and exports.
As a result, domestic demand should play a greater role in China's growth than in the past, helping to reduce global imbalances.
Many emerging-market economies will benefit from China's sustained growth and rising demand for commodities, further supporting the global recovery.
After declining by over 30 per cent in 2009, on a year-over-year basis, commodity prices are expected to increase over the next two years as the global recovery takes hold.
Based on futures markets, oil prices are assumed to rise to around US$88 per barrel in 2011.
The Bank projects non-energy commodity prices to increase by about 10 per cent in both 2010 and 2011.
The Bank expects that growth in the global economy will accelerate over the next two years, but that the pace of the recovery in advanced countries will be moderate.
It will take time to repair household and bank balance sheets, and for financial conditions to return to normal.
In the near term, growth in real output will depend to a significant degree on past and ongoing fiscal and monetary stimulus.
Although global current account imbalances narrowed during the recession, some reversal can be expected as economies recover and commodity prices strengthen.
Further corrective policy action will be required over the medium term to put global growth on a strong, yet sustainable and balanced, path.
The Canadian economic recovery is expected to evolve largely as anticipated in the October Report, with the economy returning to full capacity in the third quarter of 2011.
While core inflation has remained slightly higher than projected in recent months, total inflation has rebounded as expected.
The stickiness of core inflation since the beginning of the year is likely related to the resilience in wage growth.
With wage growth expected to stay at the more moderate levels seen recently, and with excess supply being gradually absorbed, both core and total CPI inflation are expected to return to 2 per cent in the third quarter of 2011.
Although real GDP in Canada contracted for three consecutive quarters, the magnitude of the downturn was more modest than in other major advanced economies.
In particular, domestic demand held up much better in Canada than elsewhere, reflecting the soundness of Canada's banking system, relatively healthy household and corporate balance sheets, and the speed and scale of monetary policy actions.
Nevertheless, the Canadian economy experienced a severe recession, owing largely to the downturn in sectors of the US economy that are particularly important for Canadian exports, such as the automotive and housing sectors.
Economic growth resumed in the third quarter of 2009, with real GDP increasing by a meagre 0.4 per cent (at annual rates), less than had been anticipated in the October projection.
A sharp pickup in domestic demand and a rebound in exports were mainly offset by a surprisingly large surge in imports.
Third-quarter growth in final domestic demand was broad based and stronger than expected.
The contribution of government expenditures to growth increased further, and household spending continued to recover.
An unexpected surge in investment in machinery and equipment also contributed to the pickup in domestic demand.
Overall, sales rebounded sharply, and firms continued to draw down inventories, resulting in a decline in the stock-to-sales ratio.
Net exports exerted a substantial and larger-than-expected drag on growth.
The 36 per cent increase (at annual rates) in imports was unusually large, even after accounting for the surge in investment and the appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
Both household and government spending are projected to contribute to the ongoing strength in final domestic demand, while business investment is expected to have undergone a temporary correction.
Recent indicators suggest that residential investment posted another large increase, driven by buoyant activity in the resale market.
Prices for resale housing have increased markedly with the rebound in consumer confidence and as record-low mortgage rates have increased affordability.
Housing starts also picked up towards a level consistent with demographic requirements.
In the October Report, the Bank revisited its assumptions for both trend labour productivity and trend labour input, and concluded that the profile for the growth of potential output assumed in the April Report remained appropriate.
The Bank expects potential output growth to trough at 1.2 per cent in 2009, and then to pick up to 1.5 per cent in 2010 and 1.9 per cent in 2011.
Owing to weaker-than-expected GDP growth, the amount of excess supply in the Canadian economy in the third quarter was larger than assumed in the October Report.
Excess supply is expected to have started to contract in the fourth quarter, in line with the expansion in economic activity.
The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap suggests that the economy was operating 3.7 per cent below its production potential in the fourth quarter of 2009.
When assessing excess capacity, the Bank considers its conventional measure in conjunction with several other indicators, since there is considerable uncertainty surrounding estimates of potential output, particularly when the economy is coming out of a deep recession.
In the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey , the percentage of firms reporting that they would have difficulty meeting an unanticipated increase in demand increased slightly, albeit from a very low level.
Recent indicators suggest that Canada's labour market has stopped deteriorating, consistent with the resumption of GDP growth.
Both employment levels and average hours worked appear to have bottomed out in the summer, and the unemployment rate has been hovering around 8.5 per cent.
Ongoing weakness in the labour market is nevertheless evident in the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey, in which the percentage of firms reporting labour shortages declined further, reaching its lowest level since the series began in 1998.
After reviewing all the indicators of capacity pressures and taking into account the weakness in potential output associated with the ongoing restructuring in the Canadian economy, the Bank judges that the economy was operating about 3 1/4 per cent below its production capacity in the fourth quarter of 2009.
Total CPI inflation turned positive in the fourth quarter of 2009, as had been anticipated in the October Report, as a result of year-over-year increases in energy prices.
The 12-month rate of change in the total CPI bounced back to 1.0 per cent in November (from the -0.9 per cent trough reached during the summer), and is expected to have picked up further in December.
The core rate of inflation was 1.5 per cent in November and has been slightly stronger than expected in recent months, partly owing to larger-than-anticipated increases in property taxes and in some regulated prices.
In spite of the large amount of excess supply in the economy, core inflation has remained quite close to 2 per cent since the beginning of the year.
This stickiness of core inflation is likely related to the fact that wage growth had remained high relative to the underlying trend in productivity.
With wage growth decelerating in recent months, the gap between the two has begun to narrow.
Reflecting the anticipated effects of year-over-year increases in energy prices on CPI inflation, measures of near-term inflation expectations have risen closer to the 2 per cent target in recent months.
The latest Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation is 1.7 per cent for 2010.
Expectations for average inflation over the next two years, as reported in the Bank's most recent Business Outlook Survey, continue to show inflation expectations concentrated within the Bank's inflation-control range.
Market-based measures of inflation expectations are within historical range after adjusting for liquidity effects.
Following a period of marked improvement, overall financial and credit conditions in Canada have remained fairly stable since the October Report.
Canada's overall financial conditions continue to be more favourable than in most other advanced economies, as has been the case since the onset of the global financial crisis.
The vast improvement in the credit conditions faced by Canadian borrowers over the past year is evident in the sharp declines in the spreads paid by households and businesses to secure funds.
Since the October Report, funding costs for Canadian banks have remained fairly flat at very low levels.
Borrowing costs for households also remain at very low levels by historical standards, and household credit has continued to grow at a brisk pace, pushing the debt-to-income ratio of Canadian households to a historic peak.
Although both mortgage and consumer credit posted solid growth rates in recent months, consumer credit grew more quickly, driven mainly by draws on personal lines of credit (including home equity lines of credit).
Borrowing costs for Canadian businesses have also remained very low.
Taken together, results from the Bank's latest Senior Loan Officer Survey and the Business Outlook Survey suggest that, following a period of substantial tightening, credit conditions for businesses eased slightly in the fourth quarter, for the first time since the global financial crisis began.
However, the improvement in credit conditions mainly affected large firms, as conditions continued to tighten for some small and medium-sized firms.
Business credit has started to grow again, led by an increase in market-based sources of credit.
Following a period of contraction that began in the second quarter, overall business credit grew by 3.7 per cent (at annual rates) in the three months to November.
Bank-based business credit has continued to contract sharply since the October Report, reflecting both an improvement in the ability of firms to access capital markets for funding and the further tightening of credit conditions for some small business borrowers.
Narrow monetary aggregates have continued to grow briskly, reflecting the desire of both households and firms to keep money in liquid assets until it is clear that the recovery is taking hold.
In the three months to November, the narrow aggregate M1+ grew at an annual rate of 15.5 per cent, whereas the broader aggregate M2++ grew at 6.6 per cent.
The growth in narrow-money balances is expected to decline over time, as the economy improves.
The Canadian dollar has traded in a range of about 92 to 98 cents US since the October Report.
Its average over this period was close to 96 cents US - the value assumed in the projection presented in the October Monetary Policy Report.
Canadian monetary and fiscal policies continue to provide needed stimulus to the economy.
On 8 December 2009 and 19 January 2010, the Bank of Canada maintained its target for the overnight interest rate at 1/4 per cent - the effective lower bound for this target rate - and reaffirmed its commitment, conditional on the inflation outlook, to hold the policy rate at that level until the end of the second quarter of 2010.
The outlook for the Canadian economy is very similar to that presented in the October Report, with the economy projected to return to full capacity in the third quarter of 2011.
Following weaker-than-expected real GDP growth in the third quarter of 2009, the Bank projects that, beginning around mid-year and continuing into early 2011, growth will be slightly stronger than expected in October.
This upward revision reflects a stronger global economy and the Bank's view that the import surge in the third quarter was partly the result of temporary factors.
On an average annual basis, the economy is now projected to grow by 2.9 per cent in 2010 and 3.5 per cent in 2011, after having contracted by an estimated 2.5 per cent in 2009.
Consumer spending is expected to grow at a solid pace throughout the projection horizon, supported by improved consumer confidence, higher wealth, monetary stimulus, and the recovery in the growth of labour income.
The personal savings rate is expected to begin to moderate as households unwind some of the precautionary savings they built up during the recession.
Following a period of vigorous growth, housing investment is projected to slow through 2010 as pent-up demand subsides and affordability declines.
Business fixed investment is expected to recover in 2010 with the improvement in financial conditions and economic activity, as well as higher commodity prices.
This projected increase in investment spending is consistent with the results of the Bank's recent Business Outlook Survey.
Export volumes are expected to continue to recover over the projection period in response to growing external demand and higher commodity prices.
Export growth is projected to be somewhat stronger than was expected last October, owing to a more favourable outlook for the US economy, particularly in the sectors that figure most importantly for Canadian exporters.
The persistent strength in the Canadian dollar and the absolute low level of US demand will, however, continue to dampen exports.
Import volumes are also projected to grow at a solid pace, in line with the recovery in domestic demand, the rebound in exports, and the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
The contribution of government spending to growth in domestic demand is expected to have peaked at about 2 percentage points in the last quarter of 2009, and then to gradually decline through 2010 before turning negative in 2011.
As the recovery in the Canadian economy continues, excess supply will gradually be absorbed.
The economy is expected to reach its production capacity in the third quarter of 2011, as projected in the October Report.
Measured CPI inflation in Canada is expected to be slightly higher this year than projected in the October Report, reflecting the positive surprise to core inflation in the fourth quarter of last year.
On the costs side, the Bank expects that wage growth over the projection period will remain at recent more moderate levels, compared with the first half of 2009.
In the near term, core inflation is projected to remain fairly steady as the effect of the recent slowing in wage growth is largely offset by that of the gradual absorption of excess supply.
As the impact of the first factor dissipates, and with inflation expectations well anchored, the core rate is projected to increase gradually, returning to 2 per cent in the third quarter of 2011.
With the base-year effects for gasoline prices dropping out of the data last December, total CPI inflation is projected to follow a path very similar to that of the core rate throughout the projection horizon.
Total CPI inflation is also expected to return to the 2 per cent target in the third quarter of 2011.
Chart 18 and Chart 19 depict the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core and total CPI inflation from the first quarter of 2010 to the end of 2011.
The Bank expects the recovery to be more protracted than in previous recessions, owing to the persistent effects of the financial crisis on credit markets and on household savings behaviour in many advanced economies.
It is thus possible that the recovery in global demand could be more vigorous than projected, resulting in stronger external demand for Canadian exports.
This could occur, for instance, in the event of unexpectedly rapid improvements in financial conditions and consumer confidence.
These imbalances have been attenuated during the recession, as US households have curtailed their spending, while domestic demand in Asian emerging-market economies has been boosted by aggressive policy measures.
Sustained improvement over the medium term will require fiscal consolidation in the United States and several other advanced countries, together with policy-induced domestic demand growth and real exchange rate adjustment for surplus countries.
In the absence of these conditions, large imbalances may re-emerge, with the attendant risk of disorderly adjustment.
Global economic growth has been somewhat stronger than projected, with momentum in emerging-market economies increasing noticeably.
Exceptional stimulus from monetary and fiscal policies continues to provide important support in many countries.
The recovery in the major advanced economies is still expected to be relatively subdued, reflecting ongoing balance sheet adjustments and the gradual withdrawal of fiscal stimulus commencing later this year.
The Bank now projects that the economy will grow by 3.7 per cent in 2010 before slowing to 3.1 per cent in 2011 and 1.9 per cent in 2012.
This profile reflects stronger near-term global growth, very strong housing activity in Canada, and the Bank's assessment that policy stimulus resulted in more expenditures being brought forward in late 2009 and early 2010 than expected.
At the same time, the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar, Canada's poor relative productivity performance, and the low absolute level of US demand will continue to act as significant drags on economic activity in Canada.
The Bank expects the economy to return to full capacity in the second quarter of 2011.
The outlook for inflation reflects the combined influences of stronger domestic demand, slowing wage growth, and overall excess supply.
Core inflation, which has been somewhat firmer than projected in January, is expected to ease slightly in the second quarter of 2010 as the effect of temporary factors dissipates, and to remain near 2 per cent throughout the rest of the projection period.
Total CPI inflation is expected to be slightly higher than 2 per cent over the coming year, before returning to the target in the second half of 2011.
Despite the firming of the global and Canadian recoveries, there are considerable risks around the Bank's outlook.
It is possible that the momentum in household expenditures and residential investment could be greater than currently expected.
Internationally, a faster-than-expected global recovery could stimulate external demand for Canadian exports and improve the terms of trade.
There are two main downside risks to inflation.
First, the global economic recovery could be more protracted than currently projected.
Second, the combination of the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar and Canada's poor relative productivity performance could exert a larger-than-expected drag on growth and put additional downward pressure on inflation.
While risks to the inflation outlook remain elevated, the Bank judges that they are roughly balanced over the projection horizon.
In response to the sharp, synchronous global recession, the Bank lowered its target rate rapidly over the course of 2008 and early 2009 to its lowest possible level.
This unconventional policy provided considerable additional stimulus during a period of very weak economic conditions and major downside risks to the global and Canadian economies.
With recent improvements in the economic outlook, the need for such extraordinary policy is now passing, and it is appropriate to begin to lessen the degree of monetary stimulus.
On 20 April 2010, the Bank maintained its target for the overnight rate at 1/4 per cent and removed the conditional commitment.
The extent and timing of any additional withdrawal of monetary stimulus will depend on the outlook for economic activity and inflation, and will be consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target.
The global economy is evolving largely as expected, with strong growth in many emerging economies accompanied by moderate recovery in most advanced economies.
While growth has been somewhat stronger than projected, and global financial conditions have generally improved, exceptional monetary and fiscal stimulus continues to provide important support in many countries.
Owing to substantial output gaps, underlying inflation pressures in the major advanced economies are subdued.
Unemployment rates appear to be stabilizing and, in some cases, have begun to decline.
However, the restrained pace of the recovery, coupled with extensive economic restructuring in many sectors, has raised concerns that the crisis may have persistent effects on productivity growth and long-term unemployment.
US GDP growth in the fourth quarter of 2009 was stronger than expected, at 5.6 per cent, supported by a larger contribution from inventories and a greater-than-expected rebound in investment in equipment and software.
Consumption increased by a modest 1.6 per cent, and was heavily dependent on government transfers.
Indeed, were it not for net government transfers, household disposable income would have declined over the past two years.
The most recent employment numbers for the United States suggest that the period of large-scale job losses is coming to an end, which should provide support for private spending in coming quarters.
GDP growth in the first quarter is projected to be 2.9 per cent, driven mainly by an expansion in consumption and higher inventories, while investment in structures, both residential and commercial, appears to have declined.
Economic activity in the euro area faltered in the fourth quarter, owing to a sharp drop in inventories and adverse weather conditions.
Although private domestic demand continues to be very weak, government spending and stronger exports have provided important support.
Expanding industrial production and increases in purchasing manager indexes point to positive but weak growth in the region in the first quarter.
In Japan, a 3.8 per cent increase in GDP in the fourth quarter was driven largely by net exports.
Japan's unemployment rate peaked last year and has subsequently edged down.
While government incentives are still supporting the consumption of durable goods, there are growing indications of a modest recovery in the services sector.
China's economy grew at a stronger-than-expected rate of 11.9 per cent on a year-over-year basis in the first quarter of 2010, driven by both internal and external demand.
The rebound in exports has been more vigorous than expected, owing particularly to strong demand from the ASEAN countries.
Housing prices in China have also increased sharply in recent months, and CPI inflation has started to move up, sparking concerns about underlying inflationary pressures and prompting authorities to raise mortgage rates, demand larger down payments for home purchases, and increase reserve requirements on banks.
The Bank of Canada's index of global commodity prices has increased slightly from its level last January, with a rise in oil and non-energy commodity prices - in response to stronger global demand - largely offset by a sharp drop in natural gas prices.
Most of the increase in the prices of non-energy commodities stems from a rise in base metal prices and a rebound in lumber prices, related to low inventory levels.
The decline in natural gas prices reflects seasonal effects (i.e., the onset of warmer temperatures) and ongoing weakness in US industrial demand.
Conditions in global financial markets have remained supportive, with continuing low longer-term interest rates for a broad spectrum of issuers and narrow spreads in bank funding markets.
Corporate bond issuance has been robust, and equity markets in many countries have reached new highs in response to stronger-than-expected economic indicators and continued strength in corporate earnings.
This positive overall tone has been tempered, however, by increased concerns over the fiscal situations in a number of countries, particularly in Europe.
The heightened focus on sovereign risk and growing uncertainty about fiscal sustainability pushed government bond yields sharply higher in the affected countries, but have not led to more generalized contagion across markets.
Government bond markets are also reflecting a divergence in economic conditions among various countries.
Based partly on expectations of improved growth prospects, government bond yields rose in the United States and Canada.
However, the increase in Canada was much more pronounced at the short end, causing the yield curve to flatten.
Although policy rates remain extremely low, central banks in some smaller industrialized countries and emerging-market economies have already begun to raise their rates in response to strengthening economic activity.
Many of the extraordinary central bank liquidity and credit facilities that were put in place during the crisis have also been allowed to wind down, since use of these facilities has generally declined with the ongoing improvement in financial conditions.
Securitized markets nevertheless remain impaired, despite a number of private and public sector initiatives under way to revive them.
New securitizations are likely to remain well below pre-crisis levels for some time.
Bank lending conditions remain mixed in those countries at the centre of the crisis.
The latest senior loan officer surveys for the United States and Europe indicate that commercial banks have, for the most part, stopped tightening their lending standards.
However, the considerable tightening that was put in place over the past two years has yet to be unwound, and small firms, in particular, still face restricted access to credit.
Banks continue to deleverage and are managing their risk exposures aggressively.
The near-term prospects for the global economy have improved modestly since the January Report, with growth projected to average slightly more than 4 per cent through 2012.
Upward revisions to the outlook for 2010 reflect stronger growth in China and emerging Asia, as well as additional near-term momentum in US consumer spending.
Overall, however, the outlook remains broadly unchanged, with strong growth in some emerging-market economies and a gradual recovery in the advanced economies.
Growth in many economies remains heavily dependent on fiscal stimulus and expansionary monetary policies.
Private domestic demand is projected to pick up in 2011, although it will be muted in the advanced economies compared with previous recoveries.
By 2012, however, self-sustaining private demand is expected to be firmly entrenched around the world.
US GDP growth in 2010, on an average annual basis, is expected to be somewhat higher than projected in the January Report, largely as a result of stronger-than-expected growth in the fourth quarter of 2009 and the first quarter of 2010.
Fiscal stimulus will continue to be an important driver of growth this year, while consumption is projected to be relatively restrained and heavily dependent on government support.
The subdued level of consumer demand in 2010 is reflected in the Bank's outlook for US motor vehicle sales, which remain well below pre-crisis levels over the projection horizon.
Even though the withdrawal of fiscal stimulus will have a dampening effect on US economic activity in 2011 and 2012, GDP growth in both years should still average 3.5 per cent.
Growth in employment and personal income over the period should lead to modest but steady increases in household spending.
While US exports are expected to rise substantially over the projection horizon, their positive contribution to growth will likely be offset by higher imports until early 2012.
Economic growth in 2010 is expected to be driven primarily by increased exports and is essentially unchanged from the January Report.
A solid recovery is not expected until 2012, since many sectors have excess capacity, and consumption is expected to be tempered by a sluggish recovery in labour markets.
The outlook for Japan remains largely unchanged, with heavy reliance on external demand for growth.
Consumption, which has been boosted by government transfers to households and incentives for purchases of durable goods, is not expected to be a major contributor to GDP growth.
The same is true of investment, as firms work off excess capacity.
Growth in China is projected to ease slightly in 2011-12, as the effects of previous stimulative measures begin to dissipate and monetary and credit policies become less accommodative, but should average roughly 9.0 per cent.
Other emerging-market economies are also expected to experience strong growth over the next three years, supported in many cases by increased export demand from China.
The Bank's non-energy commodity price index is expected to rise by about 30 per cent over the next three years as the global economy recovers, broadly consistent with the Bank's January projection.
Current oil price futures indicate that oil prices will rise to around US$91 per barrel in 2012, also in line with expectations in the January Report.
Although global current account imbalances narrowed during the recession, they have started to expand now that the global economy is recovering and commodity prices are strengthening.
As indicated by G-20 leaders, further corrective policy action will be required over the medium term to put global economic growth on a strong, sustainable, and balanced path.
Larger-than-expected increases in household income and foreign demand provided additional momentum in the final quarter of 2009 and the first quarter of 2010.
The pace of real GDP growth is expected to moderate through 2010 and 2011, owing to the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar; the removal of fiscal stimulus; and the effects of the pulling forward of household expenditures and residential investment in recent quarters in response to accommodative monetary policy.
Given the stronger growth in recent quarters, the level of economic activity in Canada is expected to remain higher than previously projected over the 2010-11 period, returning to full capacity in the second quarter of 2011, one quarter earlier than projected in January.
Core inflation has been higher than projected in recent months, while total CPI inflation has evolved largely as expected.
The strength of core inflation reflects a combination of transitory and more fundamental factors, such as the higher level of economic activity and the stickiness of wage increases relative to productivity.
The latter has contributed to the resilience of the prices of some core services over the past year.
With a more modest amount of excess supply in the economy and the more gradual deceleration in wages than previously anticipated, underlying inflation pressures are slightly more pronounced than in January.
Both core inflation and total CPI inflation (excluding the impact of the sales tax harmonization in Ontario and British Columbia) are expected to be close to the 2 per cent target throughout the projection horizon.
The modest recovery that emerged in the third quarter of 2009 gained significant momentum in the fourth quarter.
Canadian real GDP increased by 5 per cent (at annual rates), reflecting continued robust growth in final domestic demand and exports, together with a substantially smaller advance in imports than in the previous quarter.
Real gross domestic income rose even more sharply than real GDP as a result of a further improvement in Canada's terms of trade.
Growth in residential investment in the fourth quarter exceeded expectations, owing to a larger-than-anticipated effect of low mortgage rates and the home renovation tax credit.
The contribution of government spending to GDP growth also remained sizable, as expected, reflecting ongoing fiscal stimulus.
Business fixed investment fell, offsetting the modest rebound in the third quarter.
Firms have remained cautious, waiting for additional evidence of a durable recovery in demand, particularly in the United States.
Notwithstanding this caution, the rise in exports was stronger than expected, aided by a firmer recovery in US economic activity.
Meanwhile, imports increased moderately, following an exceptional surge in the third quarter.
Overall, fourth-quarter sales increased sharply, and firms reduced their inventories at a faster pace than in the third quarter, resulting in a further decline in the stock-to-sales ratio.
Recent indicators point to continued strong growth of about 5.8 per cent in the first quarter of 2010, with widespread advances in domestic demand, additional gains in exports, and the beginning of a turn in the inventory cycle.
Residential investment received a further temporary boost as households rushed to benefit from the home renovation tax credit before it expired on 31 January 2010.
As well, business investment is expected to have begun its cyclical recovery, with recent indicators suggesting a strong rebound in the oil and gas sector and related manufacturing activities.
Although the increase in real GDP in the last two quarters was stronger than anticipated, a temporary surge in growth is not atypical at this stage of the business cycle.
To put the recent downturn and recovery in perspective, it is helpful to look at key components of aggregate demand in terms of levels.
The buoyancy of government spending and, to a lesser degree, personal spending, significantly cushioned the downturn and has supported the recovery.
Exports also remain well below their pre-recession level, reflecting the persistent weakness in the level of US demand and declining competitiveness.
As a result of these developments, the level of real GDP in the first quarter of 2010 was still about 1 per cent below its peak in the third quarter of 2008, and some 2 per cent below potential.
Excess supply began to contract in the fourth quarter and narrowed further in the first quarter of 2010, with economic activity expanding much more rapidly than potential output.
The Bank's conventional measure indicates that the output gap was -2.3 per cent in the first quarter.
In assessing excess capacity, the Bank considers its conventional measure in conjunction with several other indicators, since there is considerable uncertainty surrounding estimates of potential output, particularly when the economy is coming out of a recession.
The Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey suggests that capacity pressures remained subdued in the first quarter, with the percentage of firms reporting that they would have difficulty meeting an unanticipated increase in demand still at a low level.
Both employment and average hours worked began to recover in mid-2009, and the unemployment rate has been edging down, although it remains at a relatively high level.
Results from the spring Business Outlook Survey indicate that the percentage of firms facing labour shortages has risen only modestly from the trough reached in the fourth quarter of 2009.
After reviewing all the indicators of capacity pressures, and taking into account the weakness in potential output associated with ongoing restructuring across various sectors of the Canadian economy, the Bank judges that the economy was operating about 2 per cent below its production capacity in the first quarter of 2010.
Core inflation has been firmer than projected in January, the result of both transitory and more fundamental factors.
Although core inflation was expected to remain relatively stable over the near term, it rose from 1.5 per cent in November to 2.1 per cent in February.
This upward movement partly reflects transitory factors, such as the unusual pricing pattern for new passenger vehicles since the introduction of the 2010 models into the CPI in November, and the surge in the price of travel accommodation associated with the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver.
More broadly, the firmness of core inflation over the past year, despite the large amount of excess supply in the economy, reflects the resilience in the prices of some components of core services, including a significant rise in some regulated prices (e.g., communications, tuition fees, and cable services).
This resilience reflects the slower-than-anticipated deceleration in wages, since labour costs represent a large portion of total production costs in core services.
Shelter prices have also increased at a faster-than-expected rate, reflecting the more rapid rebound in housing demand as households pulled forward some of their expenditures.
On balance, the 12-month rate of change in the total CPI in January and February was only slightly higher than projected in the January Report, since the larger-than-expected rise in core inflation was partly offset by weaker-than-expected prices in some volatile components, particularly for energy and vegetables.
With Canada's economic recovery gaining momentum and energy prices firming up, measures of near-term inflation expectations have risen closer to the 2 per cent target in recent months.
As reported in the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey, expectations for average inflation over the next two years remain concentrated within the Bank's inflation - control range, although an increasing share of respondents (40 per cent) saw inflation in the upper half of this range.
Taking this and other information into account, the Bank judges that medium- and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored at the 2 per cent inflation target.
Financial conditions in Canada have been favourable in recent months, providing ongoing support to the economic recovery.
With ample liquidity in money markets, funding costs for Canadian banks have remained very low.
The effective borrowing costs for Canadian households have also stayed at an exceptionally low level, despite some increase in mortgage rates.
In that context, both mortgage and consumer credit have continued to grow at an even faster pace than expected, fuelling personal expenditures and residential investment.
Effective borrowing costs for Canadian businesses have also remained very low.
For the first quarter of 2010, the Bank's latest Senior Loan officer Survey suggests further easing in lending conditions for large firms and stabilizing lending conditions for small businesses and commercial borrowers, following several consecutive quarters of tightening.
A similar picture emerges from the Business Outlook Survey, with large firms continuing to report an easing, and small and medium-sized firms indicating that credit conditions had, on balance, tightened.
Consistent with the experience of the economic cycle in the early 1990s, growth in total business credit has remained weak in recent months, despite the emerging recovery in overall real GDP.
As has been the case since the beginning of the economic downturn, narrow monetary aggregates have continued to grow rapidly.
This reflects both the desire of households and firms to maintain liquid assets until the recovery is well entrenched, and the limited incentive that low interest rates provide for longer-term investments.
In January and February, the average rate of increase, on a year-over-year basis, in the narrow monetary aggregate M1+ (at about 15 per cent) was well above historical experience, while that of the broader aggregate M2++ (at less than 6 per cent) was slightly below the past trend.
Growth in narrow money balances is expected to decline over time as the economy recovers.
The Canadian dollar has appreciated since the January Report and has recently averaged about 99 cents US, roughly 3 per cent higher than the value of 96 cents US assumed in the January Report.
The Bank's base-case projection incorporates the following key assumptions: a Canada/US exchange rate averaging 99 cents US; energy prices in line with recent futures prices; prices for non-energy commodities increasing progressively as the global economy recovers; and global credit conditions continuing to gradually improve.
The profile for growth in the Canadian economy is more front-loaded than that presented in the January Report.
Following much stronger than expected growth in real GDP in the fourth quarter of 2009 and the first quarter of 2010, the Bank now projects that growth will revert more quickly to trend.
This slower pace of growth between the second quarter of 2010 and the end of 2011 reflects the Bank's assessment that policy stimulus measures resulted in considerably more expenditures being brought forward in late 2009 and early 2010 than expected, a somewhat weaker outlook for US economic growth starting in the second half of 2010, and the higher assumed level for the Canadian dollar.
On an average annual basis, GDP is now projected to grow by 3.7 per cent in 2010 before slowing gradually to 3.1 per cent in 2011 and 1.9 per cent in 2012.
The economy is now expected to return to full capacity in the second quarter of 2011, one quarter earlier than projected in January.
This year should mark the turning point when private sector demand takes over from the public sector as the primary source of growth.
By 2011, the private sector should be the sole contributor to the growth of domestic demand in Canada.
In this regard, the Bank's estimates of the contribution of government spending to real GDP growth suggest that it peaked at about 2 percentage points in the second half of 2009 and will gradually decline, turning negative in the second half of 2011.
Although some slowing is anticipated from the rapid pace registered early in the year, consumer spending is expected to grow robustly throughout the projection horizon, aided by an accommodative monetary policy, gains in employment and labour income, and improved consumer confidence.
However, the recent increase in household indebtedness and prospective increases in the debt-service ratio should dampen household spending in the coming years.
Investment in housing is projected to weaken markedly through the remainder of 2010 and well into 2011.
This reflects the significant amount of activity that was pulled forward in late 2009 and early 2010 by exceptionally low mortgage rates and the recently expired home renovation tax credit, together with the tightening of mortgage affordability.
The gradual recovery in business investment that started at the beginning of 2010 is expected to intensify over the projection horizon, driven by improved economic prospects and the need to increase productivity in a more competitive international environment.
The Bank's outlook for investment spending in 2010 is consistent with the results reported in its spring Business Outlook Survey and Statistics Canada's 2010 Beginning-of-Year Survey of Private and Public Investment Intentions.
With respect to business inventories, the adjustment required to return the stock-to-sales ratio to a more sustainable level appears to be largely completed, which should provide support to real GDP growth over the projection horizon.
Exports are projected to rise over the projection horizon, in response to growing external demand and higher world commodity prices.
The persistent strength of the Canadian dollar and rising unit labour costs will, however, dampen the expansion.
Export growth in 2011 is projected to be somewhat weaker than assumed in January, owing to more subdued prospects for US economic activity and the higher value assumed for the Canadian dollar.
Import volumes are also projected to grow at a somewhat slower pace over the projection horizon, reflecting the revised outlook for growth in domestic demand and exports.
With the higher amount of expenditures brought forward resulting in somewhat smaller excess supply, as well as a more gradual deceleration in wages than previously anticipated, inflationary pressures are slightly more pronounced than expected in January.
The Bank's base-case projection for inflation now incorporates estimates for the effect of the sales tax harmonization in Ontario and British Columbia.
Effective 1 July 2010, both provinces will harmonize their provincial sales tax with the federal goods and services tax.
As a result, a broader range of goods and services will be taxed in Ontario and British Columbia.
According to the Bank's calculations, the direct impact will be a temporary rise of 0.6 percentage points in the year-over-year rate of increase of total CPI between July 2010 and June 2011.
This reduction in production costs should have some offsetting effect on consumer prices over time.
The Bank's base-case projection assumes that these cost savings will be transmitted gradually during the second half of the year, eventually reducing core and total CPI by a cumulative 0.3 percentage points.
As has been the case with previous changes in indirect taxes, for the purposes of monetary policy, the Bank will look through the first-round effect of the tax harmonization on prices.
Core inflation is expected to ease slightly in 2010 as the effect of temporary factors dissipates and tax refunds to businesses (resulting from the introduction of the HST) are passed through to consumers.
With inflation expectations well anchored, core inflation is expected to remain near 2 per cent throughout the projection period.
The effect of the recent slowing in wage growth, together with improvements in labour productivity, is offset by the gradual absorption of excess supply.
Total CPI inflation, excluding the effect of the HST, is expected to be slightly higher over the coming year than was projected in the January Report.
With base-year effects for energy components, notably natural gas, dropping out of the data, this measure of inflation is expected to return to 2 per cent in mid-2010.
Total CPI inflation, including the effect of the HST, is expected to be slightly higher than 2 per cent over the coming year, before returning to the target in the second half of 2011.
Chart 21 and Chart 22 depict the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the second quarter of 2010 to the end of 2012.
On 20 April, the Bank maintained its target for the overnight rate at 1/4 per cent and removed its conditional commitment.
Despite the firming of the global and Canadian recoveries, there are still considerable risks around the Bank's outlook.
Domestically, while private consumption and residential investment have recently grown at an even faster pace than anticipated, the Bank expects a deceleration in the growth of private consumption to a more sustainable rate, as well as a marked weakening in housing activity.
However, it is possible that the momentum in domestic demand could be greater than currently expected, owing to buoyant household confidence and easy financing conditions.
Internationally, a faster-than-expected global recovery could create additional inflationary pressures by stimulating external demand for Canadian exports and improving the terms of trade.
The Bank expects that private sector demand will be sufficiently strong once fiscal stimulus measures are unwound.
There is a risk, however, that self-sustaining growth in private demand will take longer to materialize than currently expected and will falter as policy stimulus is withdrawn.
There is also a risk that sovereign credit concerns could intensify, leading to higher borrowing costs and a more rapid tightening of fiscal policy in some countries.
Either of these factors would restrain global private demand relative to the Bank's base-case projection.
Second, there is a risk that the combination of the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar and Canada's poor relative productivity performance could exert a larger-than-expected drag on growth and put additional downward pressure on inflation.
These imbalances narrowed during the recession, as US households curtailed their spending, while domestic demand in Asian emerging-market economies has been boosted by aggressive policy measures.
Sustained improvement over the medium term will require fiscal consolidation in the United States and several other advanced countries, together with policy-induced growth in domestic demand and real exchange rate adjustments for surplus countries.
The global economic recovery is proceeding but is not yet self-sustaining.
Greater emphasis on balance sheet repair by households, banks, and governments in a number of advanced economies is expected to temper the pace of global growth relative to the Bank's outlook in April.
While the policy response to the European sovereign debt crisis has reduced the risk of an adverse outcome and increased the prospect of sustainable long-term growth, it is expected to slow the global recovery over the projection horizon.
In the United States, private demand is picking up but remains uneven.
Housing activity is declining markedly from high levels, consistent with the Bank's view that policy stimulus resulted in household expenditures being brought forward into late 2009 and early 2010.
While employment growth has resumed, business investment appears to be held back by global uncertainties and has yet to recover from its sharp contraction during the recession.
The Bank expects the economic recovery in Canada to be more gradual than it had projected in April, with growth of 3.5 per cent in 2010, 2.9 per cent in 2011, and 2.2 per cent in 2012.
This revision reflects a slightly weaker profile for global economic growth and more modest consumption growth in Canada.
The Bank anticipates that business investment and net exports will make a relatively larger contribution to growth.
While the Bank now expects the economy to return to full capacity at the end of 2011, two quarters later than had been anticipated in April, the underlying dynamics for inflation are little changed.
The Bank will look through the transitory effects on inflation of changes to provincial indirect taxes.
The risks around this projection remain elevated and are judged to be roughly balanced over the projection horizon.
Globally, on the upside, the boost in confidence as advanced countries restore fiscal sustainability could generate greater-than-expected offsets to the fiscal consolidation.
On the downside, global private demand around the world, including in the United States, may be insufficient to sustain the recovery.
In Canada, there are important two-sided risks to the outlook for private demand.
On the upside, private demand might have greater momentum than expected, reflecting strong confidence and easy credit conditions.
On the downside, it is possible that households reduce expenditures more than currently anticipated or that the recovery in business investment is further delayed.
Since April 2010, with improvements in the economy, the Bank has ended its extraordinary conduct of monetary policy.
On 20 April 2010, the Bank removed its conditional commitment, which had provided considerable additional stimulus during a period of very weak economic conditions and major downside risks to the global and Canadian economies.
On 1 June 2010, the Bank raised its target for the overnight rate by one-quarter of one percentage point to 1/2 per cent.
As part of that interest rate decision, the Bank re-established its normal operating framework for the implementation of monetary policy, resetting the target for the overnight rate at the midpoint of the operating band and the width of the operating band to 50 basis points.
On 20 July 2010, the Bank raised its target for the overnight rate by a further one-quarter of one percentage point to 3/4 per cent.
These decisions leave considerable monetary stimulus in place, consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target in light of the significant excess supply in Canada, the strength of domestic spending, and the uneven global recovery.
Given the considerable uncertainty surrounding the outlook, any further reduction of monetary stimulus would have to be weighed carefully against domestic and global economic developments.
The intensification of sovereign debt concerns in Europe has led to increased uncertainty, a tightening of global financial conditions, and a reduction in world commodity prices.
The hand-off from public stimulus to private demand in advanced economies is proceeding but has yet to be accomplished.
In most advanced economies, monetary policy is likely to remain stimulative for some time, but fiscal stimulus is expected to be neutral to negative over the coming year.
Private demand is expected to become the main driver of global growth through 2011-12 as the recovery in employment and household income gradually builds.
Growth in many regions of the world was stronger than expected in the first quarter of 2010, supported in particular by temporary government incentives that led households to pull their expenditures forward.
As a result, second-quarter growth in many countries is projected to have slowed as these temporary effects dissipated.
While there is strong momentum in many emerging-market economies and some consolidation of the recoveries in the United States, Japan, and other advanced economies, growth remains weak in Europe.
US real GDP grew at an annual rate of 2.7 per cent in the first quarter and is estimated to have grown by 2.4 per cent in the second quarter - in both instances slightly weaker than expected at the time of the April Report.
Growth over this period has been supported by fiscal and monetary stimulus, as well as by the post-recession turn in the inventory cycle.
Recent data on consumption and residential investment indicate, however, that growth will likely be more subdued than previously expected, consistent with weak growth in employment recorded in the second quarter (excluding the temporary jobs related to the census).
Consequently, the recovery in US private domestic demand is likely to be more gradual than previously expected.
Economic activity in the euro area recovered modestly in the first quarter, supported by sustained growth in government spending and exports, as well as by a sizable contribution from inventories.
Private final domestic demand remains weak, however.
More recently, incoming data related to industrial production have generally been stronger than projected, suggesting that growth in the second quarter has improved, reflecting in part the resumption of activity after weather-related disruptions in the first quarter and increased export sales.
The recovery is strongest in the core European countries, especially in Germany, with little evidence to this point of spillover effects from weakness in vulnerable economies.
In Japan, real GDP growth in the first quarter, at 5.0 per cent, continued to rebound sharply, supported by substantial fiscal stimulus and a strong increase in exports.
This momentum is expected to have slowed in the second quarter as government stimulus was scaled back.
Although net exports continue to be an important contributor to growth, a number of indicators suggest that Japan's economic recovery is slowly broadening.
In the first quarter of 2010, China's economy grew at a stronger-than-expected rate of 11.9 per cent (on a year-over-year basis), driven by robust internal and external demand.
Growth eased to 10.3 per cent in the second quarter, however, as the effects of fiscal stimulus began to fade and the measures introduced by Chinese authorities to cool activity in the property market started to take hold.
There is evidence that the economy may be in a state of excess demand, with wages rising and price pressures in some sectors mounting.
The authorities have responded by tightening credit conditions through a variety of measures, and growth in credit and asset prices has started to decelerate.
The Bank of Canada's index of global commodity prices has declined by about 4 per cent since the release of the April Monetary Policy Report, driven by decreases in the prices of oil and non-energy commodities, which were partially offset by an increase in natural gas prices.
Much of the decline in commodity prices can be attributed to a general shift away from riskier assets over this period and an expected slowing in the global economic recovery due to the sovereign debt crisis in Europe and the tightening of policy in China.
Despite evidence that the global economic recovery is progressing, there have been renewed strains in financial markets arising from growing concerns about sovereign risks in some European countries and related bank exposures.
These financial tensions highlight the vulnerabilities that still exist in the global financial system.
At the time of the April Report, the impact of concerns about sovereign risk had been largely confined to an increase in government bond yields for some highly indebted European countries, especially Greece.
Concerns about contagion and spillover effects became more acute, leading to a broader deterioration in conditions across financial markets.
The announcements of stabilization measures by European authorities and the International Monetary Fund have helped to improve market conditions since then, but spreads on sovereign debt for the most-affected countries in the euro area remain considerably wider than at the time of the April Report, and overall financial conditions are tighter and more volatile.
The European debt crisis has increased uncertainty and led to concerns about possible spillover effects from the financial system to the real economy.
Elevated uncertainty in global financial markets has caused an increase in volatility, a decline in equity prices, and a widening of credit spreads across a broad range of private sector assets, such as corporate bonds-albeit to levels well below those seen in the autumn of 2008 and the first half of 2009.
The impact of the wider spreads on corporations' borrowing costs has thus far been largely offset by lower yields on government bonds in the major economies, owing to a reassessment of growth prospects, expectations that policy rates are likely to remain extremely low, and portfolio shifts towards more-liquid and less-risky assets.
While access to capital markets has improved following the disruption in early May, when concerns about sovereign risks peaked, corporate issuance in Europe and the United States remains below levels seen earlier this year.
Bank lending conditions have remained roughly unchanged in most advanced economies.
The latest senior loan officer surveys for the United States and Europe indicate that, for the most part, commercial banks have not tightened their lending standards further.
In Europe, planned fiscal consolidation may result in slower short-term growth, which could make debt servicing more difficult for households and firms, and result in further losses and a weakening of bank balance sheets.
In addition, many European banks hold large amounts of sovereign debt from vulnerable euro-area countries on their balance sheets.
European authorities recently announced that they are performing stress tests to assess the vulnerability of their banks and will publish the results on 23 July 2010.
The Bank's base-case projection assumes that the policy actions taken to date in Europe will be effective in preventing further deterioration in financial conditions and the spread of contagion to other euro-area countries and beyond.
Overall, the global economic recovery is expected to remain on track, but is likely to be more gradual than had been expected in the April Report, with growth projected to average slightly less than 4 per cent through 2012.
Downward revisions to the outlook through 2011-12 reflect a more gradual recovery in private domestic demand, as well as the adverse effects of the sovereign debt crisis, including accelerated fiscal consolidation.
Owing to the slow pace of the recovery and the existence of sizable output gaps, underlying inflation pressures in the major advanced economies continue to be limited.
However, inflation pressures are rising in many emerging-market countries and are expected to pick up further over the projection horizon, in response to their strong economic performance and, in some cases, easy monetary conditions.
With growth averaging 3 1/4 per cent through 2011-12, some excess capacity is expected to persist at the end of the projection horizon, given the depth of the recession and the pace of potential growth.
US GDP growth is projected to be slightly weaker than anticipated in the April Report, owing to the fallout from the sovereign debt crisis in Europe and a more protracted recovery in private domestic demand.
Although fiscal stimulus remains an important driver of growth in 2010, its withdrawal will have a dampening effect on US economic growth over the rest of the projection period.
The growth of consumption is projected to be modest as households strive to rebuild their savings, while the recovery in residential investment is expected to be restrained by foreclosure sales, limited access to credit for builders, and the payback from temporary tax incentives for home buyers (which pulled housing demand forward).
Growth in business investment is anticipated to pick up gradually, but is likely to remain sluggish relative to previous recoveries (particularly investment in structures), owing to high levels of unused industrial capacity and tight credit conditions (especially for small businesses).
Although exports are projected to grow strongly over the projection horizon, their profile is lower than in the April Report because of weaker foreign demand and a stronger US dollar.
The outlook for the euro area is clouded by recent developments in vulnerable European economies.
Economic growth is expected to be more subdued than projected in the April Report, owing to increased uncertainty, more aggressive fiscal consolidation, a deterioration in credit conditions reflecting stress in bank funding markets, and reduced confidence.
A sluggish recovery is projected over 2010-12, supported by exports, which should benefit from a weaker euro.
Domestic demand is expected to remain muted, owing to modest growth in employment and wages, and higher taxes.
In Japan, the recovery is projected to proceed largely as expected in the April Report, with net exports remaining the main driver of growth.
The withdrawal of government subsidies should slow the growth of consumption, while the appreciation of the yen since the outbreak of the sovereign debt crisis will dampen export growth.
Japanese monetary and financial conditions are expected to remain very supportive.
Rapid growth in China is projected to converge gradually towards trend growth of approximately 8 to 9 per cent through 2011-12, in line with the gradual removal of fiscal stimulus, the implementation of credit-tightening measures (targeted at the property market and local government borrowing), and an assumed appreciation of the Chinese currency.
Domestic demand is expected to remain the primary source of growth, since exports are likely to be adversely affected by the sovereign debt crisis in Europe, which is China's largest export market.
Other emerging-market economies are projected to experience robust growth over the next three years, supported in many cases by both strong domestic demand and technology-related exports.
The expected path for commodity prices over the projection horizon has been revised downwards since the April Report, reflecting the softer outlook for global economic growth.
This is evidenced by a lower but rising track for oil futures prices, which increase from about US$75 per barrel to around US$82 by the end of 2012.
As the global economy recovers, the Bank's non-energy commodity price index is also projected to rise steadily to a level slightly below that expected in the April Report.
The economic recovery in Canada is proceeding largely as expected, supported by fiscal and monetary stimulus, higher terms of trade, improved labour markets and household confidence, and the recovery in the global economy.
As in the April Report, the Bank expects the pace of growth in economic activity to slow, owing to the pulling forward of consumer expenditures and residential investment induced by the policy stimulus, and the gradual removal of the fiscal stimulus.
This deceleration is now expected to be slightly more pronounced in 2010 and 2011, largely reflecting the weaker and more uncertain outlook for the global economy relative to the April Report.
Consumption growth is projected to be more modest, in line with lower income growth.
Uncertainty is also expected to dampen the rebound in business investment over the short term.
However, the lower assumed value for the Canadian dollar should help to boost net exports.
Overall, the level of economic activity in Canada is projected to return to full capacity slightly later than previously expected.
The projection for Canadian inflation is largely unchanged relative to the April Report, reflecting small and offsetting revisions to the outlook.
As expected in the April Report, Canadian real GDP rose sharply in the first quarter, by 6.1 per cent (at annual rates), reflecting further solid growth in domestic demand, along with a continued recovery in exports.
Further improvement in Canada's terms of trade led to an even sharper rise in real gross domestic income.
In the first quarter of 2010, the level of real GDP moved back up, close to its pre-recession peak, owing to ongoing fiscal stimulus, the strength in consumer spending, and robust residential investment.
Household spending was somewhat stronger than anticipated in the quarter, supported by solid gains in labour income, improved confidence, and favourable credit conditions.
Growth in residential investment also exceeded expectations, as households rushed to take advantage of the home renovation tax credit before it expired at the end of January.
A faster-than-expected turnaround in the inventory cycle also provided a considerable boost to overall GDP growth.
However, with firms remaining uncertain about the sustainability of the recovery in global demand, the rebound in business fixed investment was more subdued than expected.
Indeed, the level of business fixed investment is still depressed, following a faster and deeper decline than experienced in previous recessions.
Recent indicators point to a slowing in real GDP growth to about 3.0 per cent in the second quarter.
Consumer spending has moderated, while residential investment has contracted markedly, as expected, following the expiry of the renovation tax credit, the tightening of mortgage criteria, and the rise in mortgage rates.
In contrast, the recovery in business investment is expected to have started, aided by increased purchases of machinery and equipment associated in part with a rebound in the oil sector.
As well, government expenditures have been boosted temporarily by spending associated with the G-8 and G-20 summits hosted by Canada in June.
Excess capacity in the Canadian economy continued to diminish in the second quarter.
The various indicators that the Bank considers provide somewhat diverging results with regard to the magnitude of the decrease.
The Bank's summer Business Outlook Survey suggests that the amount of excess capacity has diminished noticeably since its peak in the third quarter of 2009, with the percentage of firms reporting that they would have difficulty meeting an unexpected increase in demand rising to its highest level since the third quarter of 2008.
In contrast, the Bank's conventional measure indicates that the output gap was still significant.
In particular, employment has increased very rapidly in recent months and is now essentially back to its pre-recession level.
Nevertheless, the unemployment rate is still relatively high, and average weekly hours worked remain lower than they were before the recession.
In addition, results from the summer Business Outlook Survey indicate that the percentage of firms facing labour shortages has risen only modestly from the trough reached in the fourth quarter of 2009.
On balance, the various indicators of capacity pressures are consistent with the Bank's view that potential output grew at about 1.2 per cent in 2009 and 1.5 per cent more recently.
In this regard, the Bank judges that the economy was operating at about 1 1/2 per cent below its production capacity in the second quarter of 2010.
Core inflation has evolved as expected in the April Report, while total CPI inflation has been somewhat lower than projected, owing mainly to lower-than-anticipated prices for gasoline.
Core inflation has edged down to slightly below 2 per cent in recent months, with the partial unwinding of transitory factors that boosted inflation early in the year (particularly the surge in the price of travel accommodations associated with the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver).
More fundamentally, the easing of downward pressure on inflation stemming from the reduction of excess supply in the economy has been largely offset by the easing of upward pressure coming from the growth in labour compensation, which has helped to keep core inflation close to 2 per cent.
Recent survey measures indicate that inflation expectations remain well anchored at the 2 per cent target.
The July Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation in 2010 was 1.9 per cent.
The Bank's summer Business Outlook Survey reports that 95 per cent of firms are expecting average inflation over the next two years to be within the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent control range.
The survey also shows that expectations are evenly spread between firms expecting inflation to be in the bottom half of the range and those expecting inflation to be in the upper half.
Market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations continue to lie within their historical range.
Canadian financial markets have been relatively resilient in the face of stressful conditions in international markets.
In particular, bank funding markets in Canada have been largely unaffected by pressures in global short-term funding markets.
However, global stresses have led to a decrease in the prices of risky assets and some widening of risk premiums.
Overall, financial conditions in Canada have remained favourable, providing ongoing support to the economic recovery.
Funding costs for Canadian banks have risen slightly since the April Report, owing to expectations of rising policy rates and somewhat larger risk premiums.
Effective borrowing costs for Canadian households have also edged up, but are still at exceptionally low levels.
In that context, the expansion of total household credit has remained robust.
Effective borrowing costs for Canadian businesses have also risen slightly since April, although they too remain exceptionally low.
At the same time, the Bank's latest surveys, the Senior Loan officer Survey and the Business Outlook Survey, indicate that credit conditions for firms have eased in recent months.
In particular, the Senior Loan officer Survey reported a modest net easing for small business and commercial borrowers for the first time since the onset of credit tightening in the third quarter of 2007.
Despite favourable borrowing costs, growth in total business credit continues to be sluggish, partly reflecting the relatively high level of liquidity held by the non-financial corporate sector and weak investment.
Growth in the narrow monetary aggregates remains well above historical experience, reflecting both the desire of households and firms to maintain liquid assets in a period of heightened uncertainty, and the limited incentive that low interest rates provide for investment in longer-term deposits.
Growth in the broader aggregate M2++, in contrast, has slowed markedly since the end of 2009 and is now somewhat below its previous trend, consistent with subdued inflation pressures ahead.
The Canadian dollar has depreciated since the April Report, averaging 96.4 cents US over the period, compared with the 99 cents US value assumed in the April Report.
The lower value for the Canadian dollar reflects in part the general appreciation of the US currency in response to the European sovereign debt crisis and the recent declines in commodity prices.
Global credit conditions are expected to gradually improve over the projection horizon, although from a somewhat less favourable position than was expected in the April Report, reflecting the heightened concerns about sovereign debt in some European countries.
The pace of real GDP growth is expected to moderate through the remainder of this year and into 2011.
As in the April Report, this moderation mainly reflects the pulling forward of consumer spending and residential investment in response to accommodative monetary policy and temporary fiscal measures, and the gradual removal of the fiscal stimulus.
However, the accelerated global fiscal consolidation and the weaker and more uncertain global outlook imply a slightly more pronounced deceleration in economic growth in Canada than previously expected.
There is also a slight shift in the composition of demand, away from domestic demand and towards net exports, reflecting mainly weaker consumption and import growth.
On an average annual basis, real GDP is projected to grow by 3.5 per cent in 2010, before slowing to 2.9 per cent in 2011 and 2.2 per cent in 2012.
The economy is now expected to return to full capacity at the end of 2011.
The Bank continues to expect consumer spending to slow to a pace more consistent with income growth.
Over the projection horizon, household spending should continue to be supported by a strengthening labour market.
As in the April Report, investment in housing is projected to weaken further through the remainder of 2010 and well into 2011.
This reflects the significant amount of activity that was moved forward in late 2009 and early 2010 by exceptionally low mortgage rates and the recently expired home renovation tax credit, together with tighter mortgage affordability and higher house prices.
The heightened level of uncertainty over the pace and composition of the global recovery is expected to continue to hamper business investment.
This is consistent with the easing in the balance of opinion reported in the latest Business Outlook Survey with respect to intentions regarding investment in machinery and equipment over the next 12 months.
Nevertheless, business investment is expected to increase to levels consistent with previous recoveries, driven by the need to expand capacity and to increase productivity in a more competitive international environment.
The strong financial position of the Canadian non-financial corporate sector and easy credit conditions are expected to underpin these investments.
At the same time, with the adjustment in the stock-to-sales ratio largely completed, business inventories are expected to provide only modest support to overall real GDP growth over the projection horizon.
As in the April Report, the Bank estimates that the contribution of government spending to real GDP growth will gradually decline and turn negative in 2011.
Aided by the lower value assumed for the Canadian dollar, exports are projected to increase slightly more over the 2010-11 period than projected in the April Report, despite somewhat weaker growth in external demand.
Imports are expected to increase less rapidly than in the April scenario, owing to softer final domestic demand, reduced inventory accumulation, and the lower exchange rate.
Although excess supply was somewhat smaller in early 2010 than previously assumed, slower growth in subsequent quarters results in a modestly more persistent output gap than in the previous profile.
In addition, the impact of lower energy prices on total CPI inflation is partially offset by the lower value assumed for the Canadian dollar.
As in April, the Bank's base-case projection for inflation incorporates estimates for the effect of the harmonized sales tax in Ontario and British Columbia.
According to the Bank's calculations, the direct impact will be a temporary rise of 0.6 percentage points in the year-over-year rate of increase in total CPI lasting from July 2010 to June 2011.
As part of the shift to the HST, most taxes currently paid on business inputs will be refunded through tax credits.
While this reduction in production costs should have some offsetting effect on consumer prices over time, the extent and the timing of this effect are difficult to assess.
The Bank's base-case projection assumes that these cost savings will be transmitted gradually during the second half of the year, eventually reducing core and total CPI by a cumulative 0.3 percentage points, all else being equal.
In addition, the Bank's base case scenario now incorporates the announced increase in the provincial sales tax in Quebec, effective in January 2011, which is expected to add about 0.1 percentage points to total CPI inflation over 2011.
As has been the case with previous changes in indirect taxes, for the purposes of monetary policy, the Bank will look through the first-round effect of these tax changes on prices.
Combined with a cyclical pickup in labour productivity, this slowdown is expected to gradually reduce inflation pressures.
This effect is expected to be offset by the gradual absorption of excess supply.
Over the next year or so, the transitory effect of the introduction of the HST is projected to keep core inflation slightly below 2 per cent, as the tax refunds to businesses are passed through to consumers.
At the same time, total CPI inflation (excluding the effect of changes in indirect taxes) is projected to be more subdued than in April and to remain somewhat below 2 per cent, mainly because of lower expected energy prices.
Thereafter, both core and total CPI inflation are expected to be at the 2 per cent target.
This projection includes a gradual reduction in monetary stimulus consistent with achieving the inflation target.
Some of the risks identified in the April Report have materialized.
Most notably, sovereign debt concerns in Europe have intensified.
Policy actions taken in response have reduced the likelihood of an adverse outcome and have enhanced medium-term sustainability.
Nonetheless, the risks around this projection remain elevated.
On the upside, the boost in confidence as advanced countries restore fiscal sustainability could generate greater-than-expected offsets to the fiscal consolidation.
There is also a risk that momentum in emerging-market economies could be stronger than currently anticipated, particularly if measures to cool demand prove less effective than expected.
On the downside, private demand around the world may be insufficient to sustain the recovery.
In the United States, elevated uncertainty and high unemployment may induce households to increase savings and reduce consumption growth more than is currently expected.
In Europe, slower growth in private demand could set in motion an adverse feedback loop between growth, financial conditions, and fiscal balances.
On the downside, it is possible that households will reduce expenditures more than is currently anticipated to maintain their savings rate close to its recent average.
Moreover, the projection assumes that investment will return to levels consistent with previous recoveries.
Given the uncertainty around the global outlook, there is a risk that the recovery in investment could be further delayed.
The agreement by the G-20 leaders on policies to support strong, sustainable, and balanced growth, and the mutual assessment process, are important steps to reduce the risks associated with global imbalances.
Without this, large imbalances may reemerge, with the attendant risk of disorderly adjustment.
The global economic recovery is entering a new phase.
In advanced economies, temporary factors supporting growth in 2010 - such as the inventory cycle and pent-up demand - have largely run their course and fiscal stimulus will shift to fiscal consolidation over the projection horizon.
While the Bank expects that private demand in advanced economies will become sufficiently entrenched to sustain the recovery, the combination of difficult labour market dynamics and ongoing deleveraging in many advanced economies is expected to moderate the pace of growth relative to prior expectations.
These factors will contribute to a weaker-than-projected recovery in the United States in particular.
Growth in emerging-market economies is expected to ease to a more sustainable pace as fiscal and monetary policies are tightened.
Heightened tensions in currency markets and related risks associated with global imbalances could result in a more protracted and difficult global recovery.
The economic outlook for Canada has changed.
The Bank expects the economic recovery to be more gradual than it had projected in its July Monetary Policy Report, with growth of 3.0 per cent in 2010, 2.3 per cent in 2011, and 2.6 per cent in 2012.
With housing activity declining markedly as anticipated and household debt considerations becoming more important, the Bank expects household expenditures to decelerate to a pace closer to the rate of income growth over the projection horizon.
Overall, the composition of demand in Canada is expected to shift away from government and household expenditures towards business investment and net exports.
The strength of net exports will be sensitive to currency movements, the expected recovery in productivity growth, and the prospects for external demand.
Inflation in Canada has been slightly below the Bank's July projection.
The recent moderation in core inflation is consistent with the persistence of significant excess supply and a deceleration in the growth of unit labour costs.
The Bank judges that the output gap is slightly larger and that the economy will return to full capacity by the end of 2012 rather than the beginning of that year, as had been anticipated in July.
The inflation outlook has been revised down and both total CPI and core inflation are now expected to converge to 2 per cent by the end of 2012, as excess supply in the economy is gradually absorbed and inflation expectations remain well anchored.
Important risks remain around this outlook and the Bank judges that the risks to the inflation outlook are roughly balanced.
The three main upside risks are higher commodity prices, a stronger-than-anticipated recovery in the US economy, and the possibility of greater-than-projected momentum in the Canadian household sector.
These upside risks are balanced by three downside risks relating to Canada's international competitiveness, global growth prospects, and the possibility of a more pronounced correction in the Canadian housing market.
On 8 September 2010, the Bank raised its target for the overnight rate by one-quarter of one percentage point to 1 per cent.
On 19 October 2010, the Bank maintained the target for the overnight rate at 1 per cent.
This leaves considerable monetary stimulus in place, consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target in an environment of significant excess supply in Canada.
At this time of transition in the global recovery, with a weaker US outlook, constraints beginning to moderate growth in emerging-market economies, and domestic considerations that are expected to slow consumption and housing activity in Canada, any further reduction in monetary policy stimulus would need to be carefully considered.
The global recovery is entering a new phase.
To date, global economic growth has been supported by massive and timely monetary and fiscal stimulus in advanced economies and sustained momentum in emerging markets.
As fiscal stimulus is withdrawn around the world, private demand is projected to become sufficiently entrenched to sustain a modest recovery.
However, the overall profile for global economic growth is weaker, reflecting the broad forces of household, bank and sovereign deleveraging.
In the United States, households will need to continue to restrain their spending over a prolonged period in order to repair balance sheets and rebuild wealth.
In this environment, monetary authorities in many advanced economies are likely to keep policy interest rates at historically low levels for an extended period and, in some cases, may introduce additional stimulus measures.
Sustaining the global recovery will require a greater rotation of demand, supported by increased flexibility in exchange rates.
At present, these adjustments are coming through divergent inflation pressures rather than currency movements, which could result in a more protracted and difficult recovery.
Recent developments highlight important geographic divergences in underlying economic growth.
In the United States and Japan, the pace of the recovery has slowed, even as the momentum in most emerging-market economies remains strong.
Growth has been firmer in Europe's core economies, but activity has weakened markedly in the peripheral countries.
Underlying inflation pressures in the major advanced economies remain subdued, but are building in emerging-market countries.
Real GDP in the United States slowed to an annual growth rate of 1.7 per cent in the second quarter and is estimated to have increased by 2.3 per cent in the third quarter - in both instances, this is weaker than anticipated at the time of the July Monetary Policy Report.
The recovery in the labour market has been lacklustre, restraining the growth in labour income.
In addition, household balance sheets are under pressure from elevated debt levels and the dramatic collapse in home prices, which has left a significant portion of mortgaged homeowners with negative equity.
More positively, revised US national accounts data indicate that the personal savings rate rose more rapidly than previously estimated, to a level consistent with a gradual rebuilding of US household wealth towards historical averages.
If savings rates remain near current levels (absent a further shock to confidence), consumption will grow at a rate close to income growth.
The US housing market has shown renewed weakness.
Following the expiry of the tax credit for first-time homebuyers, housing sales have decreased markedly, suggesting softer underlying demand.
High inventories of unsold houses (including foreclosures) are expected to restrain new construction and housing prices.
US business investment in structures also remains depressed, reflecting high vacancy rates.
In contrast, growth in business investment in equipment and software continues to be strong, as firms strive to replace the capital that depreciated during the recession and to improve productivity.
Taken together, these developments suggest that the pace of the recovery in US private domestic demand will be more gradual than assumed in the July Report.
Real GDP growth in the euro area picked up sharply in the second quarter, reaching 3.9 per cent.
However, recent indicators suggest a more moderate pace of growth in the third quarter.
In the core economies, activity has picked up noticeably, led by strength in exports.
Real GDP growth in the peripheral European countries, in contrast, has been weak and unemployment high.
The measures taken by governments to improve fiscal sustainability have reduced concerns about a major debt crisis in Europe, but considerable structural adjustment remains to be implemented.
In Japan, real GDP growth slowed markedly to 1.5 per cent in the second quarter, and recent data point to weak growth in the third quarter.
Measures to stimulate domestic demand appear to be having a slight positive effect, although unemployment remains relatively high.
Japanese authorities have taken additional steps to stimulate growth and alleviate pressures on their currency, including further monetary and fiscal policy easing and the first intervention in foreign exchange markets in six years.
A recently proposed fiscal stimulus program aims to boost domestic demand through consumption incentives, new infrastructure projects and employment support.
Although the effects of the fiscal stimulus introduced during the recession have begun to diminish and the measures to cool activity in the property market have started to take hold, growth in investment and consumption has remained robust.
Net exports, in contrast, contributed only modestly to growth in GDP over this period, as both imports and exports rose rapidly.
While crude oil prices are higher, natural gas prices have fallen significantly in response to weather-related factors and excess supply.
Prices for non-energy commodities have increased by about 5 per cent over the same period, in some cases reaching recent highs.
Strong demand by emerging-market economies and growing investor interest have supported metals prices, while weather-related factors have driven up the prices of agricultural products.
Overall, conditions in global financial markets are very stimulative.
Borrowing rates are at or near record lows in a number of countries, and capital markets remain open to a broad range of financial and non-financial corporate issuers.
With markets focused on the strength and durability of the global recovery, macro concerns have dominated idiosyncratic ones, leading to higher correlations across asset prices.
Worries about the fiscal positions and banking sectors of some peripheral European countries remain, and a negative shock would risk triggering renewed strains in global financial markets.
Heightened tensions in foreign exchange markets and risks related to growing global imbalances have become a key source of vulnerability.
Government bond yields in the major advanced economies have decreased noticeably since July.
Markets expect that, as a result of reduced prospects for growth and inflation, policy interest rates will be maintained at very low levels over a longer period than previously assumed, and that some countries may resort to further unconventional measures to stimulate demand.
Global equity prices have risen since the July Report, while corporate bond spreads have tightened slightly.
Investor demand for corporate bonds continues to be very strong, as illustrated by historically low corporate bond yields and record US-dollar high-yield bond issuance.
Bank lending conditions have moved in different directions across advanced economies.
Surveys indicate that lending conditions in the United States and Japan eased somewhat in the second quarter of 2010 - a modest unwinding of the tightening that occurred over the previous two years.
Emerging-market economies have experienced large capital inflows as investors search for higher yields.
Policy-makers in a number of these countries have increasingly taken action to limit the impact of these inflows on their currencies and economies.
By restricting capital movements, these actions could increase volatility in financial markets and heighten trade tensions.
The global economic recovery is expected to proceed at a more gradual pace than previously anticipated.
Growth in the advanced economies is projected to slow over the coming year, reflecting the withdrawal of fiscal stimulus and modest growth in private demand, while growth in emerging-market economies is expected to ease to more sustainable rates over the projection horizon.
Steps taken by policy-makers to limit capital inflows and prevent exchange rate movements are impeding the rotation of demand from advanced to emerging-market economies that is necessary for a sustainable recovery.
The Bank has long expected that the US recovery will be slower than in previous postwar cycles, consistent with the historical experience following financial crises.
Although modest recovery in private domestic demand is still projected to more than offset the drag from the unwinding of fiscal stimulus, the overall outlook for US economic growth is weaker than was anticipated in the July Report.
This reflects delayed recovery in the US labour market, more protracted weakness in housing and a slightly more modest contribution from exports.
Growth in household spending is expected to pick up gradually, sustained by a measured improvement in the pace of job creation, even as households continue to address balance-sheet pressures through elevated savings rates.
Consumption will also continue to be influenced by fiscal policy decisions, as well as by developments in the housing market, where a sharp rebound in the near term looks unlikely despite the substantial declines in both prices and housing starts.
This will be supported by strong corporate balance sheets, low financing costs and modest improvements in lending conditions, particularly for small and medium-sized enterprises.
Growth in investment in structures is anticipated to be slower than investment in equipment and software, however, owing to the high level of vacant office and retail space.
Firmer external demand for US goods and services, prompted by an anticipated further depreciation of the US dollar, is expected to support growth in net exports over the projection horizon.
In the euro area, the recovery is expected to be modest through 2011-12, owing to the restraining effects of fiscal consolidation and a stronger euro.
Growth in core economies will depend importantly on export demand.
Growth in peripheral economies is projected to be constrained by higher financing costs and large fiscal adjustments.
In Japan, growth in domestic demand is expected to be weaker than had been anticipated in July, although some pickup remains likely as labour market conditions improve.
Net exports are expected to remain the principal driver of growth through 2012, supported by strong external demand, especially from Asia.
In China, real GDP growth is projected to converge gradually towards trend growth of 8 to 9 per cent over the projection horizon, owing to the withdrawal of fiscal stimulus and the restraining effects of policy measures to cool the property market.
A gradual rotation of demand towards consumption and away from investment is expected to continue, supported by rising wages and an anticipated modest appreciation of the Chinese currency.
A gradual slowing of real GDP growth is expected in other emerging-market economies, reflecting the withdrawal of fiscal stimulus and, in some cases, a tightening in monetary policy in response to inflationary pressures.
The Bank's commodity price index is expected to increase over the projection horizon.
Non-energy commodity prices are expected to rise through 2012, albeit to a lower level than had been expected at the time of the July Report, in line with downward revisions to the Bank's projection for global demand.
The expected path for natural gas prices (as suggested by the latest futures curve) has also been revised downwards over the projection horizon, owing to softer US demand and ongoing excess supply in the market.
The economy is entering a period of more modest growth, following the robust expansion of domestic demand since mid-2009 that restored pre-crisis levels of output and employment.
The composition of demand in Canada is expected to shift away from household and government expenditures towards business investment and net exports.
The strength of net exports will be sensitive to currency movements, the expected recovery in productivity growth and the prospects for external demand.
With accommodative financial conditions continuing to provide support, economic growth is projected to be sufficient to absorb excess capacity, although at a more gradual pace than anticipated in the July Report.
As a consequence, the Bank now projects a slightly more subdued profile for core inflation over the projection horizon.
Canadian real GDP growth slowed to 2.0 per cent (at an annual rate) in the second quarter, a larger deceleration than expected in the July Report.
This growth brought real GDP back to its pre-recession level, reflecting strength in household and government spending.
Household consumption and housing investment in the second quarter were supported by further improvement in the labour market, with the growth of personal disposable income receiving an extra lift from unusually large tax refunds.
Consumers also continued to take advantage of exceptionally stimulative credit conditions, pushing household debt levels to record highs.
Following a steep decline and delayed recovery, the rebound in business investment finally gained momentum in the second quarter, with a sharp rise in spending on machinery and equipment.
Businesses also replenished their inventories to levels more consistent with sales.
Net exports subtracted from growth in the second quarter as imports were boosted by strength in business investment and higher inventories.
The recent deterioration in the real trade balance also reflects a deterioration in Canadian competitiveness in recent years, as relative unit labour costs have increased.
The Bank estimates that real GDP decelerated slightly in the third quarter to an annual growth rate of 1.6 per cent, reflecting a smaller contribution to growth from personal consumption and a sizable drop in housing investment.
As well, the large contribution to growth from inventory investment in the first and second quarters is not expected to be repeated.
Growth in the third quarter was likely supported by further strong recovery in business investment and some pickup in government expenditures, while recent data suggest a continued drag from net exports.
The Bank has revised its profile for potential output growth in Canada very slightly, as part of its annual comprehensive reassessment.
Potential output growth is now expected to increase from 1.6 per cent in 2010 to 2.1 per cent in 2013.
Trend productivity growth is projected to improve as a result of stronger investment and the dissipation of the adverse effects of restructuring in some sectors, while demographic forces continue to push down the trend rate of labour input growth.
Various indicators of capacity suggest that considerable slack remains in the Canadian economy.
Excess capacity diminished noticeably through the early part of the year from its peak in the third quarter of 2009, but has increased marginally in recent months.
The Bank's conventional measure indicates that the output gap widened slightly in the third quarter to about -1.9 per cent.
The Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey also indicated that the proportion of firms that would have difficulty responding to an unexpected increase in demand remained below the historical average, declining slightly from the summer survey.
Although the economy has recouped the 400,000 jobs lost during the recession, there has been greater recourse to part-time employment by firms.
Partly as a result, average hours worked still remain well below their pre-recession level.
At the same time, results from the autumn Business Outlook Survey indicate that the percentage of firms facing labour shortages has risen in recent months, but is still well below its historical average.
On balance, the Bank judges that the economy was operating at about 1 3/4 per cent below its production capacity in the third quarter of 2010, a slightly greater degree of slack than had been estimated in the July Report.
Core inflation remained close to 2 per cent through early 2010 before declining slightly in recent months.
The 12-month rate of change in the core CPI reached 1.6 per cent in July and August, slightly below the Bank's expectations at the time of the July Report.
The recent moderation in core inflation is consistent with the persistence of considerable excess supply in the economy and the observed decline in the growth of unit labour costs.
Temporary factors that had boosted the core rate of inflation earlier in the year, such as the unusual pricing pattern for new motor vehicles, have now unwound.
Total CPI inflation has increased from its recent trough of 1.0 per cent in June, reaching 1.7 per cent in August, owing largely to the impact of changes in provincial indirect taxes.
This is also slightly below the Bank's expectations in the July Report, reflecting marginally softer core inflation and lower-than-anticipated natural gas prices for consumers.
The October Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation in 2011 was 2.0 per cent.
As reported in the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey, 85 per cent of firms expect average inflation over the next two years to remain within the 1 to 3 per cent control range.
Market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations also continue to be consistent with the 2 per cent inflation target.
Financial conditions in Canada remain exceptionally stimulative, providing important ongoing support to the economic recovery.
Lower government bond yields and narrow bank funding spreads have kept effective borrowing costs for Canadian households very low by historical standards, despite increases in the policy interest rate.
Reflecting these low borrowing costs, household credit has continued to expand at a robust pace, although recent growth has been marginally slower than earlier in the year.
Effective borrowing costs for Canadian businesses also remain extremely low.
Corporate bond yields across a range of credit ratings have reached record lows despite near-record issuance, as strong investor demand has kept spreads narrow, while government yields have declined.
Canadian firms' access to bank financing has also improved in recent months, according to both the Bank's Senior Loan Officer Survey and the Business Outlook Survey.
In particular, the Senior Loan Officer Survey suggests that the easing in lending conditions for large corporate borrowers in recent quarters has broadened to commercial borrowers, reflecting heightened competition among lenders amid modest growth in loan demand.
This soft demand is mirrored in the continued sluggish growth of overall business credit, reflecting the availability of firms' internal funds and the still-low level of investment.
Growth in narrow monetary aggregates has slowed in recent months from the unusually rapid pace earlier in the year, consistent with diminishing liquidity preference among households and firms.
Growth in the broader M2++ aggregate remains below its historical average, suggesting subdued inflation pressures ahead.
The Canadian dollar has averaged 97 cents US over the past three months and 98 cents US since the 8 September interest rate announcement, slightly higher than the 96 cents US assumed in the July Report.
The Bank's base-case projection for growth incorporates the following key assumptions: a Canada/US exchange rate averaging 98 cents US; energy prices in line with recent futures prices; higher prices for non-energy commodities as the global economy recovers; and supportive global credit conditions.
The economic expansion is weaker than the Bank had projected in its July Report.
This reflects a more gradual global recovery and a somewhat more subdued profile for household spending.
Over the projection horizon, the composition of demand in Canada is expected to shift away from government and household expenditures towards business investment and net exports.
On an average annual basis, real GDP is projected to grow by 3.0 per cent in 2010, 2.3 per cent in 2011 and 2.6 per cent in 2012.
The economy is expected to return to full capacity by the end of 2012.
In the Bank's base-case scenario, growth in household expenditures is expected to decelerate to a pace closer to that of income growth over the projection horizon.
As in the July Report, growth in personal disposable income is expected to slow as a result of the withdrawal of fiscal stimulus, announced compensation restraints by governments and a slow recovery in average hours worked.
Moreover, Canadian household balance sheets are also increasingly stretched, and private consumption is unlikely to be bolstered by gains in house prices going forward.
Residential investment still remains near historically high levels but is expected to weaken further into 2011, reflecting subdued income growth and declining affordability.
Based on budget announcements, the Bank assumes that fiscal stimulus will end in early 2011, and that the contribution of government spending to overall real GDP growth will turn mildly negative.
Following an unusually sharp contraction, business investment is projected to increase to levels consistent with previous recoveries, reflecting efforts to improve competitiveness, firms' strong financial positions and favourable credit conditions.
This projection is consistent with the new high in the balance of opinion regarding firms' intentions to invest in machinery and equipment reported in the latest Business Outlook Survey.
In particular, firms reported an increasing focus on enhancing productivity.
The projected investment profile in the Bank's base-case scenario should contribute to raising potential output in Canada.
At the same time, with the adjustment in the stock-to-sales ratio completed, business inventories are expected to provide very modest support to overall real GDP growth over the projection horizon.
The expanding world economy is expected to provide support to Canadian exports over the projection horizon.
However, with weaker projected growth in US activity over the remainder of 2010 and 2011 and competitiveness challenges, Canadian exports are expected to rise less rapidly than previously anticipated.
As in the July Report, the growth of imports is projected to ease markedly from the rapid pace of late 2009 and early 2010, owing in part to slower growth in final domestic demand, as well as the end of the inventory cycle.
With a larger and more persistent output gap than previously assumed, the profile for core inflation is more subdued than in the July Report.
Core inflation is expected to remain near current levels in coming quarters before edging up to 2 per cent by the end of 2012, as excess supply in the economy is gradually absorbed and inflation expectations remain well anchored.
As well, ongoing modest growth in labour compensation, combined with an anticipated pickup in productivity, is expected to restrain growth in unit labour costs and, in turn, inflation pressures.
Over the coming quarters, core inflation will also be dampened by the transitory effect of the harmonized sales tax introduced in two provinces in July, as associated tax refunds to businesses are passed through to consumers.
The direct impact of recent changes in consumption taxes in Ontario, British Columbia and Nova Scotia is a temporary rise of 0.7 percentage points in the year-over-year rate of increase in total CPI from July 2010 to June 2011.
The Bank's base-case projection for inflation also incorporates an estimate for the announced increase in the provincial sales tax in Quebec, effective in January 2011, which is expected to add about 0.1 percentage points to total CPI inflation over 2011.
As with previous changes in indirect taxes, for the purposes of monetary policy, the Bank will look through the first-round effect on prices of these changes in provincial sales taxes.
Total CPI inflation is also projected to be more subdued than was anticipated in July, mainly reflecting the lower profile for core inflation.
The impact on total CPI inflation of the higher profile for crude oil prices is partially offset by the higher value assumed for the Canadian dollar.
Over coming quarters, with the gradual dissipation of the effect from the earlier reduction in mortgage interest costs, total CPI inflation (excluding the effect of changes in indirect taxes) is expected to rise gradually to the 2 per cent target by the end of 2012.
This projection includes a gradual reduction in monetary stimulus over the projection horizon, consistent with achieving the inflation target.
Chart 28 and Chart 29 depict the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the fourth quarter of 2010 to the end of 2012.
The Bank has downgraded its outlook for the Canadian and global economies, and important risks remain around this outlook.
The Bank judges that the risks to inflation are roughly balanced.
The three main upside risks to the inflation outlook are higher commodity prices, a stronger-than-anticipated recovery in the US economy, and the possibility of greater-than-projected momentum in the Canadian household sector: Commodity prices might rise faster and further than currently projected, boosting incomes in Canada and stimulating investment activity.
Commodity prices could be supported by stronger-than-expected growth in emerging-market economies and heightened investor interest in commodities, fuelled by exceptionally low global interest rates and ample liquidity.
Greater-than-expected improvements in housing and labour markets in the United States could boost consumer and business confidence in that country, resulting in stronger export demand for Canadian goods and services.
Household spending in Canada could be stronger than expected if borrowing continues to exceed income growth, or if growth in incomes were to rebound more rapidly than the Bank projects.
These upside risks to inflation are balanced by three downside risks relating to Canada's international competitiveness, global growth prospects, and the possibility of a more pronounced correction in the Canadian housing market: A combination of disappointing productivity performance and persistent strength in the Canadian dollar could dampen the expected recovery of Canada's net exports.
Heightened tensions in foreign exchange markets could inhibit necessary global adjustment and put additional pressure on freely floating currencies.
Global deflationary forces could intensify if the necessary rotation of demand from deficit countries to surplus countries and from the public to the private sector is delayed or fails to materialize.
If there were a sudden weakening in the Canadian housing sector, it could have sizable spillover effects on other areas of the economy, such as consumption, given the high debt loads of some Canadian households.
The global economic recovery is proceeding at a somewhat faster pace than the Bank had anticipated, although risks remain elevated.
Private domestic demand in the United States has picked up and will be reinforced by recently announced monetary and fiscal stimulus.
Ongoing challenges associated with sovereign and bank balance sheets will limit the pace of the European recovery and are a significant source of uncertainty to the global outlook.
In response to overheating, some emerging markets have begun to implement more restrictive policy measures.
Their effectiveness will influence the path of commodity prices, which have increased significantly since the October Monetary Policy Report, largely reflecting stronger global growth.
The recovery in Canada is proceeding broadly as anticipated, with a period of more modest growth and the beginning of the expected rebalancing of demand.
The contribution of government spending is expected to wind down this year, consistent with announced fiscal plans.
Stretched household balance sheets are expected to restrain the pace of consumption growth and residential investment.
In contrast, business investment will likely continue to rebound strongly, owing to stimulative financial conditions and competitive imperatives.
Net exports are projected to contribute more to growth going forward, supported by stronger US activity and global demand for commodities.
However, the cumulative effects of the persistent strength in the Canadian dollar and Canada's poor relative productivity performance are restraining this recovery in net exports and contributing to a widening of Canada's current account deficit to a 20-year high.
Overall, the Bank projects the economy will expand by 2.4 per cent in 2011 and 2.8 per cent in 2012 - a slightly firmer profile than had been anticipated in October.
With a little more excess supply in the near term, the Bank continues to expect that the economy will return to full capacity by the end of 2012.
Underlying pressures affecting prices remain subdued, reflecting the considerable slack in the Canadian economy.
Core inflation is projected to edge gradually up to 2 per cent by the end of 2012, as excess supply in the economy is slowly absorbed.
Total CPI inflation is being boosted temporarily by the effects of provincial indirect taxes, but is expected to converge to the 2 per cent target by the end of 2012.
Despite improvements in the outlook for the global and Canadian economies, risks to inflation remain elevated.
There are two main upside risks to inflation, relating to higher commodity prices and the possibility of greater-than-projected momentum in the Canadian household sector.
There are two main downside risks to inflation, relating to Canadian competitiveness and the possibility of weaker-than-projected household expenditures in Canada.
In addition, challenges in Europe continue to be a significant source of uncertainty for the global outlook.
The Bank judges that the risks to the inflation outlook are roughly balanced over the projection horizon.
Reflecting all of these factors, on 18 January 2011 the Bank decided to maintain the target for the overnight rate at 1 per cent.
The Bank Rate is correspondingly 1 1/4 per cent, and the deposit rate is 3/4 per cent.
This leaves considerable monetary stimulus in place, consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target in an environment of significant excess supply in Canada.
Any further reduction in monetary policy stimulus would need to be carefully considered.
The global economic recovery is proceeding at a somewhat faster pace than anticipated in the October Monetary Policy Report.
In the United States, private demand has picked up and will be reinforced by recently announced monetary and fiscal stimulus.
Momentum in the emerging-market economies has been buoyed by solid increases in consumption and investment, as well as continuing strength in exports.
Economic activity in the euro area has also been slightly stronger than expected.
Nonetheless, the global recovery continues to be affected by a number of significant challenges.
Ongoing balance-sheet repair and a weak labour market will dampen the recovery in US household expenditures, while in some European countries, more aggressive fiscal consolidation and renewed concerns about bank balance sheets and the sustainability of public finances are also expected to constrain growth.
In contrast, many emerging-market economies are contending with excess demand and rising inflationary pressures.
Their efforts to contain these pressures are being complicated in some cases by a lack of exchange rate flexibility.
Global economic growth continued at a steady pace during the second half of 2010 and has been somewhat stronger than expected at the time of the October Report.
In the United States, despite weak labour market conditions, economic activity has gained some momentum, supported by a recovery in consumer and investment spending.
Growth in Europe has also held up, in spite of heightened concerns about sovereign debt in several peripheral countries.
The pace of economic activity in emerging-market economies also began to ease from high rates toward the end of 2010, reflecting the gradual withdrawal of fiscal and monetary stimulus.
Nevertheless, these economies have accounted for the majority of global growth.
Owing to significant excess capacity, policy interest rates in the major advanced economies remain at or near historic lows, and underlying inflation pressures are subdued.
In the United States, core consumer price inflation has reached record lows since the October Report.
In contrast, inflation pressures in many emerging-market countries are rising in response to excess demand.
Real GDP in the United States grew at an annual rate of 2.6 per cent in the third quarter of 2010 and is estimated to have accelerated to 3.7 per cent in the fourth quarter, owing to a pickup in consumer spending and a large, but temporary, drop in oil imports.
Although the household savings rate has eased somewhat, it nevertheless remains at a level consistent with the rebuilding of household balance sheets over the medium term.
Conditions in the US labour market remain challenging, with only one in seven of the jobs lost during the recession recovered so far, and long-term unemployment remaining near postwar highs.
US residential investment fell sharply in the second half of 2010, delaying the expected recovery of the housing sector.
A high level of vacant housing units, the recent tightening in bank lending standards for mortgage loans and increases in mortgage interest rates continue to restrain residential investment.
Delays in processing foreclosures related to procedural flaws are also likely to slow the adjustment of the housing market.
Although business investment in structures fell further in the third quarter, recent indicators suggest that the trough is close to being reached.
In contrast, investment in equipment and software has recovered most of the ground lost through the recession as firms have sought to replace the capital that had depreciated and to improve competitiveness.
The growth of exports gathered significant momentum during the second half of 2010, supported by strong demand from emerging-market economies, the depreciation of the US dollar over the past year and solid gains in productivity.
Toward year-end, in response to pronounced weakness in the US labour market and record-low core inflation, US policy-makers introduced additional stimulus measures.
As expected at the time of the October Report, the Federal Reserve announced a second round of quantitative easing in November.
In addition, the US government passed legislation in December to provide significant further fiscal stimulus over the next two years.
In the euro area, real GDP rose by 1.4 per cent in the third quarter of 2010, and available indicators point to fairly robust growth in the fourth quarter, concentrated in the core countries, especially Germany.
Growth in the peripheral economies was restrained, however, by fiscal tightening, increased concerns about sovereign debt and the banking sector, and a lack of competitiveness.
In Japan, data released since the October Report show that the recession was deeper and the rebound in 2010 was stronger, leaving the recent level of GDP slightly weaker than previously measured.
Economic growth in 2010 benefited from both robust external demand and fiscal stimulus programs designed to promote consumption.
Real GDP in China grew by slightly less than 10 per cent over the second half of 2010 on a year-over-year basis.
Domestic demand remained vigorous, supported by buoyant growth in investment spending and solid increases in consumption, while housing activity continued to rise, despite earlier attempts to cool the sector.
In an effort to counteract rising inflationary pressures, the Chinese authorities have tightened monetary policy further, with a combination of interest rate increases and various administrative measures.
The Bank of Canada's index of global commodity prices has increased by 14 per cent since the October Report, primarily reflecting solid demand, especially from Asia.
In addition, there may have been some impact from financial flows into commodities.
Natural gas prices rose by 26 per cent in response to seasonal factors but, owing to ample supply, remained well below their average level of recent years.
Oil prices have increased by about 12 per cent, driven by stronger global demand for crude oil and declining inventories, while non-energy commodity prices have risen by close to 11 per cent since the October Report, reflecting solid gains in most components.
Conditions in global financial markets remain generally accommodative, despite heightened concerns over fiscal challenges and vulnerable banking sectors in some European countries.
Government bond yields in the major advanced economies have increased since the October Report, but nevertheless remain low by historical standards.
The rise in yields appears to largely reflect upward revisions to expectations for global economic growth following the release of positive economic data and, in the case of the United States, additional fiscal stimulus.
In late October and November, investors became increasingly worried about public finances in the peripheral countries of Europe and, in some cases, the budgetary impact of stresses in the banking sector.
Credit spreads for the most affected sovereigns widened sharply, and the turbulence affected several euro-area countries.
In response, European policy-makers announced various measures to safeguard financial stability, including a stabilization package for Ireland and more aggressive fiscal consolidation measures in several countries.
The European Central Bank also increased the size of its exceptional liquidity support to euro-area banks and purchases of sovereign bonds in the secondary market.
Financial market developments since then suggest that additional measures may be required.
Notwithstanding these stresses, most global equity and corporate bond markets have continued to perform strongly since the October Report, owing to solid corporate earnings and revenues and generally better-than-expected economic data.
Global corporate bond markets continue to see robust issuance and lower spreads, particularly on riskier securities such as high-yield corporate debt, reflecting strong investor demand and increasing risk appetite.
In response to better fundamentals and growing investor interest, the currencies of several emerging-market countries have come under continued upward pressure against the US dollar.
Although authorities in these countries have reduced the frequency and scale of their foreign exchange interventions since October, several have imposed capital controls and other administrative measures.
These policy interventions risk inhibiting the process of real exchange rate adjustment required to correct global imbalances and sustain the recovery.
The global economic recovery is projected to continue at a solid pace over 2011-12 as private domestic demand becomes more firmly entrenched.
Although the effects of the debt crisis in peripheral Europe are expected to restrain global economic growth over the projection horizon, these effects are more than offset in 2011 by the impact of stronger momentum in the United States and emerging-market economies.
Real GDP in the United States is projected to rise by 3.3 per cent on an average annual basis in 2011 and by 3.2 per cent in 2012.
US growth is expected to be stronger in 2011 than anticipated in the October Report, owing to the new fiscal stimulus program, combined with a more rapid recovery in consumer spending.
Growth in US household spending is projected to be supported through 2012 by a measured improvement in the pace of job creation.
This is against a backdrop of exceptionally weak labour market conditions at present and a long-term unemployment rate that has reached historic highs.
As well, in 2011, the new fiscal measures should provide an additional impetus to .
household spending through tax reductions that boost disposable income.
However, US state and local governments are expected to limit spending and raise taxes to address large budget gaps, partially counteracting the federal government's fiscal stimulus.
Consumption will also continue to be affected by the need to repair household balance sheets and by developments in the housing sector, where a large excess supply of unsold houses is projected to have a persistent restraining effect on prices.
US business investment in equipment and software is expected to strengthen further in response to low financing costs, improved bank lending terms and a more positive growth outlook.
However, high vacancy rates in the commercial and retail sectors, combined with tighter credit terms for firms in these sectors, should continue to dampen growth in investment in structures.
Net exports are expected to make an increasingly positive contribution to growth over the projection horizon, aided by a further depreciation of the US dollar real effective exchange rate and firming external demand for US goods and services.
In the euro area, a modest recovery is projected through 2012.
Nevertheless, the region faces considerable risks and challenges.
Recent indicators suggest that growth in early 2011 will be somewhat firmer than anticipated in the October Report, especially in the core European economies.
Economic activity is expected to be somewhat weaker thereafter, reflecting fiscal austerity measures and financial pressures arising from continuing concerns about the sustainability of peripheral-country debt.
Despite ambitious deficit-cutting plans, the peripheral countries will continue to be vulnerable to shifts in market sentiment because of their substantial debt-refinancing requirements and relatively weak financial systems.
Moreover, they will remain heavily dependent on the resilience in the core economies, given the large intra-region concentration of their exports.
Economic growth in Japan is projected to slow over 2011-12 in response to the unwinding of fiscal stimulus and the earlier appreciation of the yen.
Growth nevertheless remains somewhat above that of potential output, reflecting a gradual broadening of the recovery.
An improvement in labour market conditions is expected to provide some support to domestic demand.
However, exports are projected to be an important driver of growth through 2012.
In China, a gradual rotation of demand toward consumption and away from investment and exports is expected to occur over the projection horizon, facilitated by a modest appreciation of China's real effective exchange rate.
Growth in China is projected to be somewhat higher in 2011 than was anticipated in the October Report, driven by stronger momentum in domestic demand.
Real GDP growth is projected to slow slightly in other emerging-market economies.
A removal of the fiscal stimulus introduced during the recession and a tightening in monetary policy in reaction to growing inflationary pressures are expected to moderate the growth of domestic demand.
Moreover, a modest appreciation of real exchange rates in these economies is projected to constrain the growth of their net exports.
The Bank's commodity price index is expected to increase over the projection horizon, supported by the global economic recovery.
Following recent sharp increases, prices for non-energy commodities are expected to remain relatively steady over the projection horizon as growing demand is largely offset by increases in supply.
The latest futures curves suggest that oil prices will average US$95 in 2012, and that natural gas prices will continue to rise as the excess supply is drawn down.
The Canadian economy is now in a period of more modest growth, following the strong recovery experienced in late 2009 and early 2010.
As in the October Report, the Bank projects a moderate pace of overall expansion, with accommodative financial conditions continuing to provide support as fiscal stimulus unwinds.
Demand in Canada is expected to rely relatively less on household and government expenditures and more on business investment and net exports.
The projected increase in the contribution to growth from net exports is supported by the improved near-term outlook for US and global economic growth.
However, the cumulative effects of Canada's poor relative productivity performance and the persistent strength in the Canadian dollar have eroded Canada's competitiveness and are restraining the recovery in net exports.
As projected in the October Report, growth is expected to absorb the considerable slack in the economy by the end of 2012.
In this context, total and core inflation are projected to gradually return to 2 per cent over that horizon.
Real GDP growth in Canada slowed to 1.0 per cent (at an annual rate) in the third quarter.
This was a slightly weaker result than had been expected in the October Report, as strength in domestic demand in the third quarter was largely offset by a further deterioration in net exports.
Consumer spending continued to grow robustly in the third quarter, while housing investment remained at a high level, despite the passing of several transitory supports to activity.
The strength in consumer spending was in line with the growth of personal disposable income through the second and third quarters, leaving the savings rate near its historical low.
Despite the strong increase in business investment since the end of 2009, however, less than half of the unusually large decline that occurred during the recession has been recovered.
Net exports exerted a more significant than expected drag on growth in the third quarter, as exports declined despite the further recovery in foreign activity and imports continued to be boosted by strong domestic demand.
Poor relative productivity and the persistent strength in the Canadian dollar have accounted for continued weakness in net exports.
The Bank estimates that economic growth picked up to 2.3 per cent in the fourth quarter, reflecting a rebound in net exports and a deceleration in household expenditures and business investment from their recent rapid pace of growth.
Following large contributions in previous quarters, inventories likely subtracted from GDP growth in the fourth quarter, consistent with stabilizing the trend in the stock-to-sales ratio.
The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap indicates that excess capacity in the economy was relatively stable in the fourth quarter, at about -1.8 per cent.
The Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey reported that the proportion of firms that would have difficulty responding to an unexpected increase in demand remains below its historical average, as does the proportion of firms facing labour shortages.
The still-elevated unemployment rate and the weakness in average weekly hours worked also point to the persistence of slack in the labour market.
On balance, the Bank judges that the economy was operating at about 1 3/4 per cent below its production capacity in the fourth quarter of 2010, a slightly greater degree of slack than the Bank had projected in October.
Core inflation has remained below 2 per cent in recent months, consistent with considerable excess supply in the economy, as well as the moderation in the growth of unit labour costs.
There is some evidence that HST-related tax refunds to businesses may also have been passed through, dampening core inflation in line with the Bank's expectations.
The 1.6 per cent average rate for core inflation in October and November was consistent with the Bank's projection at the time of the October Report.
Total CPI inflation has risen in recent quarters, mainly reflecting the impact of the HST and other changes in provincial indirect taxes that took effect in July, as well as higher energy prices.
Total CPI inflation in October and November averaged 2.2 per cent, slightly above the Bank's expectations in the October Report.
Recent survey measures continue to indicate that inflation expectations are well anchored at the 2 per cent target.
The January Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation was 2.2 per cent in 2011 and 2.1 per cent in 2012.
Market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations also continue to be consistent with the 2 per cent inflation-control target.
Effective borrowing costs for households remain very low by historical standards, consistent with the low level of bank funding costs.
Nonetheless, borrowing costs have risen over the past year, including a marginal increase in the period since the October Report that reflects higher yields on Canadian government bonds, in line with global developments.
In this context, the growth of household credit has eased modestly relative to the rapid pace seen earlier in 2010.
Effective borrowing costs for Canadian businesses have also stayed very low despite some increase in 2010.
As well, in recent months, access to financing has continued to improve for Canadian firms, according to both the Bank's Senior Loan Officer Survey and the Business Outlook Survey.
The Senior Loan Officer Survey suggests that heightened competition among lenders and more favourable economic conditions have driven an overall easing in lending conditions, which has increasingly spread to smaller businesses.
The improved global economic outlook and the still low level of government bond yields have underpinned strong investor demand for corporate bonds and equities, reflected in the persistence of narrow credit spreads despite elevated corporate bond issuance and further recovery in the S&P/TSX Composite Index.
Favourable financing conditions, as well as the ongoing recovery in business investment and increased activity in mergers and acquisitions, have contributed to the observed pickup in the overall growth of business credit.
Growth in the narrow monetary aggregates has continued to slow in recent months from the unusually rapid pace set earlier in 2010, consistent with reduced liquidity preference among households and firms.
The Canadian dollar has averaged 100 cents US since the December fixed announcement date, compared with the 98 cents assumed in the October Report.
It appreciated relative to other currencies, with the Canadian-dollar effective exchange rate index rising by about 4 per cent since the October Report.
The Bank's base-case projection incorporates the following key assumptions: a Canada/US exchange rate averaging 100 cents US; energy prices in line with recent futures prices; relatively steady prices for non-energy commodities; and supportive global credit conditions.
The Bank continues to expect moderate economic growth through 2011 and 2012.
As the expansion progresses, demand in Canada is projected to rely increasingly on business investment and net exports, and less on government and household expenditures.
On an average annual basis, real GDP is projected to grow by 2.4 per cent in 2011 and 2.8 per cent in 2012, a slightly stronger growth profile than had been anticipated at the time of the October Report.
More robust growth in business investment, as well as heightened near-term momentum in household expenditures and US and global demand, account for the modestly improved outlook.
Nonetheless, weaker growth in the second half of 2010 implies somewhat greater excess capacity in the near term.
Thus, the Bank continues to expect the economy to return to full capacity only by the end of 2012.
Growth in consumer spending is expected to evolve broadly in line with that of personal disposable income over the projection horizon.
The government's recently announced mortgage insurance measures will contribute to a more balanced path for household expenditures.
As in the October Report, growth in disposable income is expected to moderate from its recent trend as a result of the withdrawal of fiscal stimulus, announced compensation restraints by governments and a slow recovery in average hours worked.
With Canadian household balance sheets becoming increasingly stretched and consumption unlikely to be bolstered by gains in house prices, growth in household spending is expected to moderate in line with income growth.
This means that the savings rate is projected to remain near historic lows and household debt near historic highs.
These factors, taken together with reduced affordability, point to a weakening in residential investment over the projection horizon.
The Bank expects the share of the economy accounted for by residential investment, and by household expenditures more broadly, to decline gradually but remain well above historical averages.
The Bank's base-case scenario, which takes into account the federal government's recent announcement that stimulus measures will be extended through October, continues to assume that the contribution of government spending to real GDP growth will turn negative over the projection horizon.
The rapid increase in business investment is expected to continue over the projection horizon as the unusually sharp decline experienced during the recession is unwound.
This reflects the solid financial positions of Canadian firms, favourable credit conditions, higher commodity prices, the stronger Canadian dollar, and the impetus to improve productivity amid heightened pressures to become more competitive as the global economy recovers.
The Bank's Business Outlook Survey has also indicated a consistently high level of investment intentions in recent quarters.
Reflecting all of these factors, the Bank expects a somewhat more robust recovery in capital spending than previously projected.
Consistent with the October Report, the Bank expects an improvement in net exports over the projection horizon as external demand recovers and growth in Canadian domestic demand moderates from its previous rapid pace.
While near-term growth prospects in the United States and other foreign economies have significantly improved of late, competitiveness challenges are expected to leave the projected profile of Canadian export growth only slightly stronger than previously anticipated.
The rebalancing of domestic demand toward business investment and pressures on Canadian competitiveness also imply higher imports relative to the profile of overall domestic demand.
The strength of net exports will continue to be sensitive to currency movements and the expected recovery in productivity growth, in addition to prospects for external demand.
Core inflation is projected to gradually edge up to 2 per cent by the end of 2012, as excess supply in the economy is slowly absorbed.
As well, ongoing modest growth in labour compensation, combined with an anticipated pickup in productivity, is expected to restrain growth in unit labour costs and, in turn, dampen inflation pressures.
The near-term profile for core inflation is slightly more subdued than previously anticipated, consistent with slightly greater excess supply in the near term.
In the first quarter, the 12-month rate of core inflation will also be dampened by the unusual price increases for motor vehicles and hotel accommodation that occurred in early 2010.
Total CPI inflation is projected to remain slightly higher than the 2 per cent target over the first half of 2011, as the HST and other changes in provincial indirect taxes continue to boost the 12-month rate of change in consumer prices.
As with previous changes in indirect taxes, for the purposes of monetary policy, the Bank is looking through the first-round effect on prices of these changes.
Excluding the impact of changes in indirect taxes, total CPI inflation is expected to gradually converge to the 2 per cent target, broadly in line with the projected profile for core inflation.
Despite improvements in the outlook for the global and Canadian economies, risks remain elevated.
There are two main upside risks to inflation, relating to higher commodity prices and the possibility of greater-than-projected momentum in the Canadian household sector: The global economy could be stronger than currently anticipated, particularly if measures to moderate demand in emerging-market economies prove insufficient.
This could boost commodity prices, which would increase incomes in Canada and support stronger investment activity and household spending.
With exceptionally stimulative financing conditions, borrowing could continue to grow faster than income.
There are two main downside risks to inflation, relating to Canadian competitiveness and the possibility of weaker-than-projected household expenditures.
The Bank expects net exports to provide greater support to the Canadian economic expansion over the projection horizon.
However, with ongoing productivity challenges and the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar, the anticipated recovery in net exports may not fully materialize.
Moreover, renewed tensions in foreign exchange markets could inhibit the necessary global adjustment and put additional pressure on freely floating currencies.
With household expenditures in Canada significantly above their historical average as a share of GDP, growth in household spending might decelerate more rapidly than is currently anticipated.
Relatedly, if there were a sudden weakening in the Canadian housing sector, it could have sizable spillover effects on other areas of the economy, such as consumption, given the high debt loads of some Canadians.
Overall, the Bank judges that the risks to the inflation outlook are roughly balanced over the projection horizon.
As anticipated in January, the global economic recovery is becoming more firmly entrenched and is expected to continue at a steady pace.
In the United States, growth is solidifying, although consolidation of household and ultimately government balance sheets will limit the pace of the expansion.
European growth has strengthened, despite ongoing sovereign debt and banking challenges in the periphery.
Robust demand from emerging-market economies is driving the underlying strength in commodity prices, which is being further reinforced by supply shocks arising from recent geopolitical events.
These price increases, combined with persistent excess demand conditions in major emerging-market economies, are contributing to the emergence of broader global inflationary pressures.
Despite the significant challenges that weigh on the global outlook, global financial conditions remain very stimulative and investors have become noticeably less risk averse.
Although recent economic activity in Canada has been stronger than the Bank had anticipated, the profile is largely consistent with the underlying dynamics outlined in January.
Aggregate demand is rebalancing toward business investment and net exports, and away from government and household expenditures.
As in January, the Bank expects business investment to continue to rise rapidly and the growth of consumer spending to evolve broadly in line with that of personal disposable income, although higher terms of trade and wealth are likely to support a slightly stronger profile for household expenditures than previously projected.
In contrast, the improvement in net exports is expected to be further restrained by ongoing competitiveness challenges, which have been reinforced by the recent strength of the Canadian dollar.
Overall, the Bank projects that the economy will expand by 2.9 per cent in 2011 and 2.6 per cent in 2012.
The Bank expects that the economy will return to capacity in the middle of 2012, two quarters earlier than had been projected in January.
While underlying inflation is subdued, a number of temporary factors will boost total CPI inflation to around 3 per cent in the second quarter of 2011 before total CPI inflation converges to the 2 per cent target by the middle of 2012.
This short-term volatility reflects the impact of recent sharp increases in energy prices and the ongoing boost from changes in provincial indirect taxes.
Core inflation has fallen further in recent months, in part due to temporary factors.
It is expected to rise gradually to 2 per cent by the middle of 2012 as excess supply in the economy is slowly absorbed, labour compensation growth stays modest, productivity recovers and inflation expectations remain well-anchored.
Although the global economic recovery is expected to continue at a steady pace, global risks remain elevated.
The two main upside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the possibility of higher than projected commodity prices and global inflation, and increased momentum in Canadian household spending.
The two main downside risks to inflation relate to headwinds from the persistent strength in the Canadian dollar and the possibility that growth in household spending could be weaker than projected.
Reflecting all of these factors, on 12 April 2011 the Bank decided to maintain the target for the overnight rate at 1 per cent.
This leaves consider able monetary stimulus in place, consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target in an environment of material excess supply in Canada.
The global economic recovery is becoming more firmly entrenched and is evolving broadly in line with the Bank's projection in the January Monetary Policy Report.
In advanced economies, the hand-off from public to private demand is proceeding gradually, while growth in emerging-market countries remains vigorous.
Commodity prices have surged since the autumn in response to strong demand, especially from emerging Asia, and have been boosted further more recently by a series of supply disruptions and geopolitical events.
Increasing prices for food and energy, combined with persistent excess demand conditions, are exacerbating already elevated inflationary pressures in several emerging-market economies.
Global financial conditions have remained very stimulative, and investors have become noticeably less risk averse, despite the significant challenges that weigh on the global economic outlook.
Ongoing efforts to repair household, bank and sovereign balance sheets continue to dampen growth in many advanced economies, and rising commodity prices are leading to higher headline inflation at a time when the recovery still requires considerable policy support.
While core European economies have performed somewhat better than expected, some peripheral countries are facing severe banking and sovereign vulnerabilities that could have broader spillover effects within Europe.
Geopolitical tensions in North Africa and the Middle East and the evolving situation in Japan following the devastating earthquake on 11 March are also contributing to global uncertainty.
Developments since the January Report point to firming demand in the major advanced economies and continued robust growth in emerging-market countries.
In the United States, real GDP has exceeded its pre-crisis level, supported by continued fiscal and monetary stimulus.
Activity has also strengthened in the euro area.
Emerging-market economies remain the main drivers of global economic growth.
Real GDP in the United States increased by 3.1 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2010.
This result was weaker than anticipated in the January Report, owing to a substantially smaller contribution from inventories.
Despite recent improvements in the labour market, the level of employment is far below its previous peak, and long-term joblessness is at historically high levels.
Since the beginning of the year, US consumption has been underpinned by fiscal stimulus and more favourable financial positions.
Household borrowing conditions have improved, debt-servicing costs have declined and higher equity prices have provided support to household wealth.
Savings rates have remained elevated, consistent with the need for further deleveraging and balance-sheet repair.
The US housing market is acutely challenged.
Housing demand remains very weak, constrained by soft labour market conditions and elevated uncertainty about future real estate values.
Non-residential construction has also been soft.
Growth in US economic activity has been supported by continued solid growth in investment in machinery and equipment and a rebound in exports.
Investment in equipment and software has been underpinned by strong corporate balance sheets and improved market financing conditions, while the strength in exports has been driven by the recovery in global demand, a depreciation of the US dollar and strong productivity growth.
In the euro area, real GDP grew modestly in the fourth quarter of 2010 as bad weather disrupted activities in the construction sector.
Indicators for the first quarter point to a rebound in growth, especially in the core economies, as a result of stronger domestic demand and continued solid increases in exports.
Economic fundamentals in the peripheral economies remain much weaker than in the core countries, reflecting the increased drag from fiscal austerity measures and ongoing concerns about sovereign debt levels and bank balance sheets.
In Germany, the unemployment rate stands at its lowest level in the past two decades, while unemployment rates in Spain and Greece are at, or near, record highs.
Real GDP in Japan declined in the fourth quarter of 2010, reflecting in part the expiration of tax incentives.
Growth had resumed in the first two months of 2011, before the disruptions caused by recent events led to severe output losses that will persist in coming quarters.
Inflationary pressures are rising, real estate investment is exceptionally strong, and concerns over elevated property prices and excessive liquidity are mounting.
Authorities have taken additional measures over the past three months in an effort to suppress these price pressures.
They have raised the reserve requirement ratio for financial institutions by a total of 100 basis points, bringing it to 20 per cent for large institutions, and have increased the benchmark one-year deposit rate by 50 basis points to 3.25 per cent.
However, with inflation close to 5 per cent on a year-over-year basis, real interest rates in China are still negative.
Credit is growing by close to 20 per cent on a year-over-year basis.
Global commodity prices are elevated, driven by strong demand and a series of supply shocks.
Prices for 18 of the 23 main components of the Bank of Canada's commodity price index are above their real long-term averages.
Crude oil prices have surged in response to the unrest in North Africa and the Middle East, and prices for many non-energy commodities have reached record highs.
Much of the increased demand for energy in recent years has come from emerging-market economies, principally those in Asia.
Agricultural prices have also been boosted by strong demand from emerging Asia and, more recently, by adverse weather conditions, pushing them to new record highs.
Metals prices are also hovering near record highs, supported by robust demand from China and a shortage of global mining capacity.
The rise in commodity prices has pushed up total inflation in both advanced and emerging-market economies.
Inflationary pressures are building particularly rapidly in emerging-market economies, reflecting the large share of food items in their CPI basket, their energy-intensive production processes and excess demand conditions more generally.
While policy-makers in many emerging-market economies have responded by raising interest rates and applying other restrictive measures, monetary policy in many of these countries remains very accommodative.
In most advanced economies, policy rates have stayed at or near historic lows as a result of excess supply conditions and subdued underlying inflation pressures.
However, owing to the effects of increasing commodity prices, policy-makers in some advanced countries now face the challenge of rising headline inflation at a time when unemployment rates remain high and excess capacity persists.
Conditions in global financial markets continue to be very stimulative, although volatility has risen recently.
Government bond yields in major advanced economies are little changed from their levels at the time of the January Report and remain very low by historical standards.
Concerns over the potential effects of growing tensions in North Africa and the Middle East and the impact of the earthquake and nuclear crisis in Japan have been counterbalanced by increased optimism about the outlook for global growth and rising investor confidence.
Worries nevertheless persist about the high debt levels of some European sovereigns and the state of their banking sectors.
There is increased differentiation in European debt markets, with some borrowers effectively shut out.
To date, there has been little spillover into other European countries.
Corporate credit markets in advanced economies continue to experience strong demand, with credit spreads narrowing further and corporate bond issuance reaching new highs.
Interest rates on high-yield corporate debt issued in US dollars are currently at an all-time low, reflecting robust demand and an increased appetite for risk.
Equity prices have also risen in advanced economies since the January Report, in some cases breaching previous peaks, but are basically unchanged in emerging-market countries.
Many emerging-market economies have experienced strong upward pressure on their currencies, reflecting both their strong economic performance and their positive interest rate differentials with respect to advanced countries.
The required adjustment in real exchange rates is being delayed, however, through increased use of intervention and capital controls.
The global economic recovery is projected to proceed at a steady pace over 2011-13, largely as expected in the January Report.
Growth in private domestic demand in advanced economies is expected to broaden over the projection horizon.
Robust demand from emerging-market economies is driving the underlying strength in commodity prices, which is being further reinforced by supply shocks arising from recent geopolitical events.
These price increases, combined with persistent excess demand conditions in major emerging-market economies, are contributing to the emergence of broader global inflationary pressures.
US real GDP is expected to grow by roughly 3 per cent through 2013, a marginally lower profile for growth than in the January Report.
A gradual strengthening and broadening of private demand is expected to support the US economic expansion over the projection horizon.
Higher energy prices are projected to slightly reduce the pace of household expenditure growth.
Fiscal policy will continue to be an important driver of growth in 2011, but will become a net drag in 2012 as fiscal consolidation takes hold.
Gradually improving conditions in labour markets are expected to sustain the growth of US consumption over the projection horizon, in spite of the dampening effects of higher oil prices and the ongoing rebuilding of household balance sheets.
Temporary tax reductions that were announced late last year will also provide a significant boost to consumption in 2011.
Business investment in equipment and software is projected to grow solidly through 2013, driven by the low cost of capital, firms' healthy balance sheets and the overall improvement in economic conditions.
In contrast, only a modest recovery in the construction of new homes and non-residential structures is anticipated over the projection horizon.
Along with the sustained recovery in private demand, net exports are expected to provide increasing support to US economic growth over the projection horizon, owing to strong external demand for US goods and services.
In the euro area, real GDP is expected to increase by about 1.8 per cent on an average annual basis through 2011-12.
Growth in domestic demand will be constrained by the effects of fiscal consolidation, lingering concerns about public finances in the peripheral countries and higher oil prices.
In 2013, real GDP growth is expected to rise to 2.3 per cent as the important drag from fiscal austerity measures starts to fade.
Growth in the Japanese economy in 2011 has been reduced to 0.8 per cent in the Bank's latest projection.
Over 2012-13, growth is expected to recover, owing to reconstruction activity, as well as a gradual strengthening in private demand, supported by improving labour market conditions.
In China, further monetary and credit tightening and higher commodity prices are projected to moderate growth over 2011-13.
A modest rotation of domestic demand toward consumption and away from investment is anticipated, facilitated by the introduction of new structural policy measures that should lessen the need for precautionary savings.
Growth in net exports is expected to slow over the projection period in response to an appreciation of the Chinese real effective exchange rate.
Growth in other emerging-market economies is also projected to moderate through 2013, in response to the somewhat slower growth in China, the unwinding of the fiscal stimulus introduced during the recession, tighter monetary policy in reaction to heightened inflationary pressures and an anticipated modest appreciation of their real exchange rates.
The Bank of Canada's commodity price index is expected to remain above the levels anticipated in the January Report, owing to higher prices for oil and non-energy commodities.
Natural gas prices, as suggested by the latest futures curve, are projected to rise modestly, as demand shifts away from oil toward other energy sources.
Prices are nevertheless expected to remain low relative to their historical relationship with oil prices over the projection horizon, with the excess supply from shale production helping to contain price increases.
Prices for non-energy commodities are anticipated to increase moderately over the rest of 2011, reflecting the lingering effects of tight supply conditions on the prices of metals and agricultural products.
Thereafter, the prices of non-energy commodities are expected to decline in response to a gradual increase in metals production, the normalization of crop yields and some deceleration in demand from emerging-market economies.
The Bank's base-case scenario suggests that global imbalances will remain large through 2013.
Although actions taken by some emerging-market authorities to limit the nominal appreciation of their exchange rates will delay the resolution of these imbalances, rising inflation rates in some of these countries are pushing their real exchange rates higher.
In the United States, the anticipated fiscal consolidation should lead to increased national savings, but the negative effect of higher oil prices on the terms of trade is expected to delay the improvement in the current account balance.
Elevated commodity prices, in contrast, should strengthen the current account balances of commodity-producing countries, which, as a group, already enjoy a large current account surplus.
Economic activity in Canada has been stronger in recent quarters than the Bank had expected in the January Report.
A more modest pace of growth is projected in the period ahead, reflecting the broad economic forces identified in the January Report.
The expected rebalancing of aggregate demand in Canada has begun, with investment picking up strongly and contributions to growth from government expenditures scheduled to fade.
Household spending has shown greater-than-expected momentum in recent quarters.
The Bank continues to expect growth in consumption and residential investment to slow over the projection horizon, although the supportive effects of higher terms of trade on incomes and wealth point to a slightly stronger profile than previously anticipated.
The improvement in net exports anticipated in the January Report has occurred more quickly than expected, but further improvement will likely be restrained by the persistent strength in the Canadian dollar and a slightly lower profile for US growth than had previously been projected.
This short-term volatility reflects the impact of recent sharp increases in energy prices and the ongoing boost from changes in provincial indirect taxes.
It is expected to rise gradually to 2 per cent by the middle of 2012 as excess supply in the economy is slowly absorbed, labour compensation growth stays modest, productivity recovers and inflation expectations remain well anchored.
The persistent strength of the Canadian dollar could create even greater headwinds for the Canadian economy, putting additional downward pressure on inflation through weaker-than-expected net exports and larger declines in import prices.
Real GDP in Canada grew at an annual rate of 3.3 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2010, and is estimated to have picked up further to 4.2 per cent in the first quarter of 2011.
This has been a stronger rebound than was expected at the time of the January Report, reflecting stronger exports and consumption.
Higher commodity prices have resulted in large increases in Canada's terms of trade, leading to renewed strong growth in real gross domestic income.
Household spending has moved more in line with the growth in household incomes.
In the fourth quarter, rapid growth in consumption was consistent with a strong increase in disposable income, leaving the savings rate little changed at 4.0 per cent.
While the strong growth in disposable income in the last quarter of 2010 was supported by an improving labour market, it also received a temporary boost from government transfers related to the earlier introduction of the harmonized sales tax in Ontario.
In the first quarter, the Bank estimates that growth in consumption slowed in line with moderating income growth, although both continue to be supported by higher terms of trade and gains in household net worth.
In that context, residential investment has remained at a high level in recent quarters, although the estimated pickup in activity in the first quarter may partly reflect timing effects related to changes in mortgage insurance rules.
Business fixed investment has continued to grow at a robust pace in recent quarters, driven in particular by activity in primary industries.
Nonetheless, the estimated level of business investment in the first quarter remained well below its pre-recession peak.
While net exports made a greater contribution to growth in the fourth quarter than had been expected at the time of the January Report, this followed a period of persistently large negative contributions through much of 2009 and 2010, and preliminary evidence suggests another negative contribution in the first quarter of 2011.
The rebound in exports in the fourth quarter was driven by higher commodity exports, in part due to one-off factors such as restarted and expanded pipeline capacity.
While exports of manufactured goods such as motor vehicles have picked up more recently, the supply disruptions that have been experienced in the aftermath of the earthquake in Japan are projected to reduce the growth in the Canadian economy in the second quarter by about half a percentage point, with that lost activity likely to be recovered in subsequent quarters.
Import growth has been volatile, largely reflecting swings in inventory investment which, after pulling back sharply in the fourth quarter of 2010, appears to have normalized in the first quarter.
Various indicators of capacity pressures suggest the persistence of excess supply in the Canadian economy.
The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap indicates that excess capacity in the economy narrowed in the first quarter of 2011, to about -0.9 per cent.
The Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey suggests a lesser degree of slack in the economy, with the proportion of firms indicating that they would have difficulty responding to an unexpected increase in demand now back at its historical average.
However, the survey also indicates that the proportion of firms facing labour shortages remains well below its historical average.
This is consistent with the relatively high unemployment rate and weakness in average weekly hours worked, and implies persistent slack in the labour market.
On balance, the Bank judges that the economy continued to operate with a material degree of slack in the first quarter of 2011, at about 1 per cent below its production capacity.
This is a smaller gap than the Bank had projected in January.
As expected, core CPI inflation has fallen further in recent months.
A number of transitory factors have been dampening the year-over-year rate of core inflation, notably the effects of unusually large increases a year ago for motor vehicles and hotel accommodation (the latter related to the Vancouver Winter Olympics), as well as recent rebates on electricity prices in Ontario.
In addition, there is evidence that some of the HST-related tax refunds to businesses have been passed through to consumers, lowering core inflation by about 0.3 percentage points, in line with the Bank's prior expectations.
Looking through these factors, underlying inflation has remained broadly stable at a rate slightly above 1 per cent, reflecting persistent excess supply in the economy, as well as the moderate growth of unit labour costs and the appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
The effects of higher world prices for energy and other commodities on Canadian inflation have been tempered by the appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
The direct impact of the HST and other changes in provincial indirect taxes instituted since July 2010 are also continuing to boost the 12-month rate of change in total CPI.
Measures of near-term inflation expectations have risen slightly in recent months, reflecting observed increases in commodity prices, while measures of longer-term inflation expectations have remained little changed.
Expectations for average inflation over the next two years, as reported in the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey, are concentrated within the 1 to 3 per cent control range, with a majority of firms now expecting inflation to be in the upper half of the range, consistent with the recent rapid increase in commodity prices.
Market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations continue to be consistent with the 2 per cent inflation-control target.
Overall, the Bank judges that inflation expectations are well anchored at the 2 per cent target.
Despite a modest increase over the past year, effective borrowing costs for households and businesses continue to be very low by historical standards.
The growth of total private credit has recently moved somewhat above its historical average, as growth in business credit has picked up sharply.
The favourable effective borrowing costs for households are underpinned by the ongoing low level of bank financing costs.
Following some slowing in 2010, a pickup in household credit growth has been observed in recent months, partly reflecting stronger activity in the resale housing market.
In addition to very low effective borrowing costs, Canadian firms have seen further easing in their access to financing in recent months.
According to the Bank's Senior Loan Officer Survey for the first quarter of 2011 , greater competition among lending institutions, and from capital markets, together with a more favourable economic outlook, has led to a further loosening of lending conditions for a wider range of borrowers.
Results from the latest Business Outlook Survey also suggest that credit conditions have eased further in recent months.
Investor demand for risky assets is buoyant, reflecting expectations of an improving global economy, as well as the low level of government bond yields.
Accordingly, credit spreads have remained narrow, corporate bond issuance has been strong and the S&P/TSX Composite Index has recovered further.
In response to more favourable financing conditions and the robust recovery in business investment, the overall growth of business credit has picked up markedly in recent months.
Compared with the unusually rapid pace registered between the end of 2008 and early 2010, growth in the narrow monetary aggregates has been moderate in recent months, consistent with reduced liquidity preference among households and firms.
The Canadian dollar has averaged 103 cents US since the March fixed announcement date, higher than the 100 cents assumed in the January Report.
The Canadian-dollar effective exchange rate index has appreciated to a similar extent.
The Bank expects the rotation of aggregate demand in Canada toward business investment and net exports and away from government and household expenditures to continue over the projection horizon.
The stronger economic expansion observed in recent quarters is projected to give way to a more modest pace, as the particularly strong rebound in exports observed recently is unlikely to be sustained, given ongoing competitiveness challenges, including headwinds from the persistent strength in the Canadian dollar, as well as the one-off nature of certain elements of the rebound.
On an average annual basis, real GDP is projected to grow by 2.9 per cent in 2011 and 2.6 per cent in 2012, while growth in 2013 is expected to equal that of potential output (2.1 per cent), with the economy operating at full capacity.
This growth profile implies a slightly higher level of activity across the medium-term projection horizon, with the Bank now expecting the economy to return to full capacity around the middle of 2012, two quarters earlier than had been projected in the January Report.
As in January, the Bank expects the growth of consumer spending over the projection horizon to evolve broadly in line with that of personal disposable income, leaving the savings rate relatively stable at a low level and the ratio of household debt to income near historic highs.
The growth of disposable income is expected to moderate with the withdrawal of fiscal stimulus, previously announced compensation restraints by governments and a slow recovery in average hours worked.
Higher terms of trade are expected to provide some offsetting boost to household incomes over the projection horizon, and have led to higher household wealth.
While these supports are projected to result in a slightly stronger profile for consumer spending than had been expected in the January Report, their impact is likely to be limited, with household balance sheets remaining stretched and consumption unlikely to be bolstered by gains in house prices.
In that context, and with a projected reduction in housing affordability, residential investment remains unlikely to contribute to overall GDP growth over the projection horizon.
Thus, the Bank continues to expect the share of the economy accounted for by consumer spending and residential investment to decline toward its historical average.
The Bank's base-case scenario continues to assume that the contribution of government spending to real GDP growth will turn negative over the 2011-12 period, consistent with the previously announced unwinding of fiscal stimulus.
Revisions to the national accounts data reveal that more of the stimulus spending appears to have been delivered in 2010 than had been previously estimated, boosting the contribution of government spending in that year and correspondingly reducing its assumed contribution to the growth of GDP in 2011.
Business fixed investment is expected to continue to rise rapidly over the projection horizon as the unusually sharp decline experienced during the recession is unwound.
This reflects the solid financial positions of Canadian firms, favourable credit conditions, higher commodity prices and the stronger Canadian dollar, as well as the impetus to improve productivity amid heightened pressures to become more competitive.
Moreover, the latest results from the Public and Private Investment Intentions survey conducted by Statistics Canada suggest some firming in the growth of business investment in 2011.
The Bank continues to expect an improvement in net exports over the projection horizon, as exports recover and expand with rising external demand, and import growth slows from its previously rapid pace with the moderation in the growth of domestic demand.
The Bank continues to project, however, that the recovery in exports will be subdued relative to earlier global recoveries, with the higher level of the Canadian dollar assumed in this projection adding to long-standing competitiveness challenges.
These forces are also expected to boost imports relative to domestic demand, with the solid growth in business investment having a similar effect, given its high import content.
As a result, net exports are expected to make a positive, but modest, contribution to growth over the projection horizon.
The strength of net exports will continue to be sensitive to currency movements and the expected recovery in productivity growth, as well as to the prospects for external demand.
The Bank expects core inflation to rise gradually to 2 per cent as excess supply in the economy is slowly absorbed and inflation expectations remain well anchored.
As in January, this increase reflects the unwinding of the transitory influences currently dampening core inflation, including the effects of HST-related tax refunds passed on by businesses.
The combination of ongoing modest growth in labour compensation and higher productivity is expected to continue to dampen inflationary pressures, with the higher assumed value of the Canadian dollar providing further restraint.
Although core inflation has been slightly weaker than expected in recent months, it is projected to converge to 2 per cent somewhat more quickly than in the January Report.
This reflects the slightly smaller degree of slack in the Canadian economy over the projection horizon, as well as the sharp increases in the prices of agricultural commodities observed in recent months, which are expected to lead to a somewhat larger increase in food prices than had been expected.
Total CPI inflation is projected to peak around 3 per cent (on a monthly basis) in the second quarter of 2011, reflecting the impact of recent sharp increases in energy prices and the anticipated rise in core inflation, as well as the ongoing boost to inflation from the HST and other changes in provincial indirect taxes.
Total CPI inflation is expected to converge to core inflation at the 2 per cent target by the middle of 2012 as energy prices stabilize.
Chart 33 and Chart 34 depict the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the second quarter of 2011 to the end of 2013.
The two main upside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the possibility of higher-than-projected commodity prices and global inflation, and increased momentum in Canadian household spending.
If efforts to restrain excess demand and mounting inflation pressures in emerging-market economies prove unsuccessful, commodity prices and global inflation could rise much faster than projected, raising incomes in Canada through higher export prices and increasing pressures on domestic prices.
With exceptionally stimulative financing conditions, borrowing could grow faster than income.
High household debt levels in Canada could lead to a sharper-than-expected deceleration in household spending.
Relatedly, if there were a sudden weakening in the Canadian housing sector, it could have sizable spillover effects on other areas of the economy.
In addition, global uncertainty is being affected by high private and sovereign debt levels in many advanced economies, geopolitical tensions and the evolving situation in Japan in the aftermath of the Tohoku earthquake.
The global economic expansion is proceeding broadly as projected in April, with modest growth in major advanced economies and robust expansions in emerging economies.
The US economy has grown at a slower pace than expected and continues to be restrained by the consolidation of household balance sheets and slow growth in employment.
While growth in core Europe has been stronger than expected, necessary fiscal austerity measures in a number of countries will restrain growth over the projection horizon.
The Japanese economy has begun to recover from the disasters that struck in March, although the level of economic activity in that country will remain below previous expectations.
In contrast, growth in emerging-market economies, particularly China, remains very strong.
As a consequence, commodity prices are expected to remain at elevated levels, following recent declines.
These high prices, combined with persistent excess demand in major emerging-market economies, are contributing to broader global inflationary pressures.
Widespread concerns over sovereign debt have increased risk aversion and volatility in financial markets.
In Canada, the economic expansion is proceeding largely as projected, although the expected rotation of demand is somewhat slower than had been anticipated.
Household spending remains solid and business investment robust.
Net exports remain weak, reflecting modest US demand and ongoing competitiveness challenges, particularly the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar.
Despite increased global risk aversion, financial conditions in Canada remain very stimulative and private credit growth is strong.
Following an anticipated slowdown in growth during the second quarter due to temporary supply-chain disruptions and the impact of higher energy prices on consumption, the Bank expects growth in Canada to re-accelerate in the second half of 2011.
Over the projection horizon, business investment is expected to remain strong, household spending to grow more in line with disposable income and net exports to become more supportive of growth.
Relative to the April projection, growth in household spending is now projected to be slightly firmer, reflecting higher household income, and net exports to be slightly weaker, reflecting more subdued US activity.
Overall, the Bank projects the economy will expand by 2.8 per cent in 2011, 2.6 per cent in 2012 and 2.1 per cent in 2013, returning to capacity in the middle of 2012.
Total CPI inflation is expected to remain above 3 per cent in the near term, largely reflecting temporary factors such as significantly higher food and energy prices.
Core inflation is slightly firmer than anticipated, owing to temporary factors and to more persistent strength in the prices of some services.
Core inflation is now expected to remain around 2 per cent over the projection horizon.
Total CPI inflation is expected to return to the 2 per cent target by the middle of 2012 as temporary factors unwind, excess supply in the economy is gradually absorbed, labour compensation growth stays modest, productivity recovers and inflation expectations remain well anchored.
The Bank's projection assumes that authorities are able to contain the ongoing European sovereign debt crisis, although there are clear risks around this outcome.
More broadly, there are a number of risks to the outlook for inflation in Canada.
The three main upside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the possibility of higher-than-projected commodity prices and global inflation, stronger momentum in Canadian household spending, and the possibility that there is less excess capacity in the Canadian economy.
The three main downside risks to inflation in Canada relate to sovereign debt concerns in Europe, headwinds from the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar and the possibility that growth in Canadian household spending could be weaker than projected.
To the extent that the expansion continues and the current material excess supply in the economy is gradually absorbed, some of the considerable monetary policy stimulus currently in place will be withdrawn, consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target.
Such reduction would need to be carefully considered.
The global economic expansion is proceeding broadly as expected at the time of the April Monetary Policy Report.
Growth prospects in many advanced economies continue to be affected by the ongoing repair of household, bank and government balance sheets.
Although high commodity prices and the disasters in Japan contributed to weaker growth in the first half of 2011, economic activity in these economies is expected to rebound through the second half of the year and continue to grow at a steady pace through 2012-13, although on a somewhat lower track.
Unlike the situation in most advanced economies, growth in emerging-market economies has remained exceptionally strong.
Excess demand in many of these economies, coupled with past increases in commodity prices, is creating broader global inflationary pressures.
Contagion from recent developments in Greece has been felt most acutely in euro-area financial markets, impacting banks, non-financial corporations and other euro-area sovereigns.
Financial conditions for banks, non-financial corporations and sovereigns in other countries generally remain very supportive.
Developments during the first half of 2011 differed significantly across economic regions.
Growth has slowed in the United States, but has been fairly solid in the euro area as a whole.
In Japan, the disasters triggered on 11 March caused a marked contraction in economic activity as well as disruptions to global production networks.
Increasing demand from these countries has been the principal driver of the rise in world commodity prices, unlike in earlier periods when demand from advanced economies accounted for most of the movements in these prices.
Real GDP growth in the United States decelerated to slightly below 2.0 per cent in the first half of 2011, owing to a pronounced slowing in household spending.
Growth in US consumption continues to be constrained by the ongoing repair of household balance sheets.
In addition, consumption spending has been restrained by a number of temporary factors, including the rapid rise in oil and food prices and supply-chain disruptions from Japan, which limited the available stock of Japanese motor vehicles in the United States.
These temporary effects are expected to dissipate in coming months and growth is projected to pick up in the second half of the year, albeit at a somewhat slower pace than was anticipated at the time of the April Report.
Historical revisions indicate that, consistent with sluggish labour market conditions, growth in US real personal disposable income since the fourth quarter of 2010 has been weaker than initially reported.
The personal savings rate fell from a recent peak of 6.3 per cent in June 2010 to 5.0 per cent in May 2011, suggesting that household balance-sheet repair has not progressed as far as anticipated, especially in the context of falling housing prices and lower equity prices.
US residential investment fell further in the first half of the year as persistently high unemployment and the weak financial situation of households continued to dampen housing demand.
The inventory of vacant homes also remained elevated, leading to additional downward pressure on house prices with further negative implications for household and bank balance sheets.
Non-residential construction remains weak, but conditions in this sector appear to be stabilizing.
The most recent survey of bank lending conditions noted a slight easing in standards for commercial real estate loans for the first time since 2005 as well as an increase in the demand for loans.
Strong growth in exports and business investment in equipment and software continued to underpin US economic growth over the first half of the year.
Business investment has been bolstered by healthy corporate balance sheets and the low cost of capital.
US exports have benefited from robust external demand and improved international price competitiveness, brought about by solid productivity growth and a sizable depreciation in the US real effective exchange rate.
In the euro area, real GDP growth rebounded to 3.4 per cent in the first quarter, following weather-related disruptions at the end of 2010.
Available indicators point to slower, but still solid, growth in the second quarter.
Overall, economic activity in the first half of the year was stronger than anticipated in the April Report, mainly reflecting more robust growth in investment.
Fundamentals remain strong in the core economies, most notably in Germany, where the unemployment rate is at a post-unification low.
Some peripheral economies continue to face significant challenges, however.
Greece, in particular, has had difficulty delivering the fiscal adjustments required as part of the financing programs that it received from the International Monetary Fund and the European Union.
Weak macroeconomic performance in the periphery is leading to rising debt and deficits, exacerbating the underlying fiscal sustainability problems and intensifying financial stability concerns.
Real GDP growth in Japan contracted sharply in the first quarter.
Damage caused by the earthquake and tsunami in March constrained the growth of exports and led to a significant decline in private domestic demand.
Falling inventories also had a negative effect on growth, since the disruptions to production forced firms to run down their existing stocks to meet demand.
Real GDP is estimated to have contracted again in the second quarter, with supply bottlenecks and weakness in private domestic demand continuing to weigh on growth.
Although the drop in Japan's economic activity was much more severe than anticipated in the April Report, recent indicators suggest that it has bottomed out.
Economic growth in China eased slightly from 9.8 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2010 to 9.5 per cent in the second quarter of 2011, owing in part to the monetary tightening undertaken in the past year.
Despite the modest deceleration in economic growth, excessive credit expansion, sharp increases in property prices and rapid growth in real estate investment have raised doubts about the sustainability of the current growth path.
High local government debt levels, combined with significant government and bank exposures to the property sector, are adding to concerns about financial stability.
Excess demand conditions still prevail and inflationary pressures are rising.
Consumer price inflation currently stands at 6.4 per cent - its highest level in three years.
In the past three months, in an effort to mitigate inflationary pressures, authorities in China have raised the reserve requirement ratio for financial institutions by 150 basis points, bringing it to a historical high of 21.5 per cent for large institutions.
Authorities have also raised official interest rates by 25 basis points, to 3.5 per cent in the case of the one-year deposit rate, which remains negative in real terms.
Efforts to contain inflationary pressures appear to have been inhibited by the lack of flexibility in the country's exchange rate.
Despite recent declines, global commodity prices remain high by historical standards, supported by robust demand from emerging-market economies and tight global supply conditions.
Prices for oil and metals have fallen sharply since the last Report, reflecting market expectations for weaker economic growth, some unwinding of financial positions and, in the case of oil, the release of strategic petroleum reserves by the International Energy Agency.
North American natural gas prices, in contrast, are little changed from their levels at the time of the April Report, while agricultural prices have experienced a modest correction in response to an improved outlook for grain harvests.
Past increases in food and energy prices continue to exert upward pressure on inflation in both advanced and emerging-market economies.
These pressures are being exacerbated in many emerging-market economies by excess demand and rapid growth in wages and credit.
Monetary authorities in the emerging-market economies have taken measures to contain these inflation pressures, but monetary conditions nevertheless remain exceptionally stimulative, suggesting that inflation pressures are likely to persist.
Major advanced countries have also had to contend with rising commodity prices, but underlying inflation pressures continue to be modest, reflecting the smaller pass-through from commodity prices into core inflation and significant excess capacity.
Policy interest rates in these economies have therefore remained low.
Conditions in global financial markets remain supportive.
Several developments have weighed on investor sentiment in recent weeks, however, leading to heightened risk aversion and increased volatility.
Equity prices in advanced and emerging-market economies have declined over the past three months in reaction to greater uncertainty about the strength of the global recovery.
Conditions in corporate credit markets have also deteriorated somewhat.
Although corporate bond yields remain close to their historical lows, corporate credit spreads have widened, especially for high-yield issuers.
Corporate bond issuance has also fallen sharply, albeit from very elevated levels.
Capital has shifted into perceived safe-haven assets and currencies, putting downward pressure on government bond yields in major advanced economies.
Market concerns about acute fiscal strains in some euro-area peripheral countries, especially Greece, Portugal and Ireland, have increased noticeably, as demonstrated by the sharp widening in their sovereign spreads to new record levels.
In contrast to the period surrounding the April Report, when sovereign debt concerns were mostly confined to the weakest peripheral countries, there have been signs of contagion spreading to other European sovereigns: Spanish and Italian 10-year bond spreads have reached their highest levels since the introduction of the euro.
Contagion has also extended to the European banking sector, with bank stocks falling significantly.
Commercial banks in Greece, Ireland and Portugal have experienced serious funding problems and have relied heavily on central bank liquidity.
Other European banks have faced some deterioration in wholesale funding conditions, reflecting their direct and indirect exposures to vulnerable sovereigns.
Investor confidence in the fiscal positions of a number of advanced economies has also weakened.
Lengthy negotiations in the United States on the debt ceiling and the inability of US policy-makers to agree on a longer-term solution to that country's debt problem have weighed on market sentiment, which was already fragile.
Growth in the global economy is projected to average about 4.0 per cent annually through 2013.
Compared with the April Report, growth has been marked down in 2011, owing mostly to a weaker near-term outlook for the United States and Japan, but it is broadly similar thereafter.
As projected in past reports, deleveraging by households and sovereigns is expected to restrain growth in many advanced economies.
The Bank's base-case projection assumes that authorities are able to contain the ongoing European sovereign debt crisis, but includes a slightly lower profile for GDP growth in Europe.
A rebalancing of growth within emerging-market countries, with greater reliance on consumption spending, is expected to help support export growth in the advanced economies and set the global recovery on a more sustainable path.
Real GDP growth in the United States is projected to strengthen in the second half of 2011, averaging about 3 1/4 per cent.
The pickup in growth is driven largely by stronger consumption spending, assisted by the recent decline in oil prices, as well as a rebound in manufacturing production as imports of motor vehicle parts from Japan gradually return to normal.
US real GDP is also expected to rise by about 3 per cent on an average annual basis over the 2012-13 period.
This growth profile is broadly in line with expectations at the time of the last Report, but nevertheless implies a lower GDP track than previously anticipated.
The rise in GDP is modest by post-recession standards, reflecting the restraining effects of ongoing balance-sheet repair by households as well as an expected tightening in fiscal policy.
Significant fiscal consolidation is incorporated into the Bank's base-case projection.
This exerts a drag on US GDP growth of roughly 1 percentage point in 2012 and 1.7 percentage points in 2013.
US consumption is projected to grow at a steady pace of approximately 2 per cent through 2013, supported by a gradual recovery in the labour market that more than offsets the dampening effects of ongoing household balance-sheet repair and the drag on personal disposable income coming from fiscal consolidation.
The recovery in new residential construction is expected to be further delayed and then to proceed gradually over the projection horizon, given the elevated supply of vacant homes.
A modest recovery in the construction of non-residential structures is also expected over this period.
Exports and business investment in equipment and software are expected to remain the key drivers of the US economic expansion.
Supported by the low cost of capital and firming economic conditions, business investment should continue to grow at a robust pace through 2013.
Growth in net exports is expected to benefit from further improvements in US cost competitiveness and an anticipated rebalancing of GDP growth in the emerging-market economies toward increased domestic demand and higher imports.
Euro-area GDP is expected to expand at a moderate pace through 2013, although at a somewhat weaker rate than projected in the April Report.
Fiscal and financial strains associated with the debt crisis are expected to weigh more heavily on the region's growth prospects over the next three years.
As a result, the two-speed pace of the recovery in Europe is projected to continue, with solid momentum in most of the core economies and persistent challenges in the periphery.
A reconstruction led recovery is projected for Japan over the forecast horizon.
Improving labour market conditions should also support the growth of private domestic demand over this period.
In China, real GDP growth is expected to remain strong, but should moderate through 2012-13 in response to monetary tightening and a further real appreciation of the Chinese currency.
These developments, as well as structural reforms, should facilitate a rebalancing of growth away from capital investment and exports and toward consumption.
This rotation of demand should help diffuse pressures in the real estate market and dampen inflationary pressures, thereby reducing the probability of a sharper downturn in the future.
Economic growth in other emerging-market economies is expected to remain robust, reflecting persistent strength in domestic demand and buoyant regional and global trade.
Growth is projected to decelerate gradually over the projection period, however, as tighter monetary and fiscal policies reduce excess demand and inflationary pressures.
A modest further appreciation of their real exchange rates should also help to restrain export growth.
Although commodity prices are expected to be lower than in the April Report, they are projected to remain at historically elevated levels, supported by solid demand from emerging-market economies and limited increases in supply.
Based on the latest futures curve, oil prices should remain relatively stable, increasing slightly from current levels and reaching $104 per barrel by the end of 2013.
Natural gas prices are also expected to rise, based on the latest futures curve, but increased shale production should keep them low relative to their historical relationship with oil prices.
Non-energy commodity prices are projected to stay close to their current levels over the next three years, with a steady increase in metals production and a normalization of crop yields offsetting the effects of growing global demand.
While the supply-chain disruptions resulting from the recent disasters in Japan are leading to volatility in the near-term profile of activity, the broader outlook is little changed, with the Bank continuing to project a moderate pace of growth ahead.
The rebalancing of aggregate demand in Canada is gradually unfolding, albeit at a somewhat slower pace than anticipated.
Business investment is growing strongly and contributions to growth from government expenditures are diminishing.
The Bank continues to project a moderation in the growth of household expenditures, although this is expected to proceed more gradually than in the April projection, reflecting higher personal disposable income.
At the same time, net exports have become less of a drag on growth, but further improvement will be restrained by the downwardly revised profile for US growth and ongoing competitiveness challenges.
Core inflation has been slightly firmer than projected in the April Report and is now expected to remain around 2 per cent over the projection horizon.
Total CPI inflation is expected to remain above 3 per cent in the near term, largely reflecting temporary factors.
It is expected to return to the 2 per cent target by the middle of 2012 as temporary factors unwind, excess supply in the economy is gradually absorbed, labour compensation growth stays modest, productivity recovers and inflation expectations remain well anchored.
Real GDP in Canada grew at an annual rate of 3.9 per cent in the first quarter of 2011, broadly as expected in the April Report.
In the second quarter, growth has slowed sharply, as expected, largely as a result of temporary factors.
Growth in overall household expenditures continued to moderate in the first quarter, despite solid growth in personal disposable income and favourable financial conditions.
Growth in consumer spending was very weak, restrained in part by the adjustment to higher prices for food and energy, while residential investment rebounded strongly, reflecting some pulling forward of activity in advance of changes in mortgage insurance regulations.
At 4.2 per cent, the personal savings rate in the first quarter was somewhat higher than had been anticipated at the time of the April Report, reflecting both the weakness in consumption and upward revisions to the level of personal disposable income through 2010.
Growth in government expenditures also moderated in the first quarter.
Business fixed investment continued to grow at a rapid pace, reflecting higher spending on both machinery and equipment and non-residential structures.
Despite its strong rebound since the end of 2009, business fixed investment had recovered only two-thirds of its unusually sharp recessionary decline by the end of the first quarter.
Net exports exerted some drag on overall GDP growth in the first quarter, as anticipated in the April Report, in part reflecting Canada's ongoing competitiveness challenges.
Growth in exports moderated from the rapid pace of late 2010 as exports of non-energy commodities and machinery and equipment eased, although strong increases in exports of autos and energy (related in part to the opening of a new pipeline) supported solid overall growth.
Growth in imports reflected a resumption of inventory accumulation, as well as ongoing strength in business investment in machinery and equipment.
The Bank estimates that economic growth slowed sharply to 1.5 per cent in the second quarter, a slightly greater deceleration than expected in the April Report.
The slowdown in the second quarter is largely attributable to the expected moderation in government spending as well as to temporary factors, notably the effects of higher food and energy prices on consumer spending in Canada and the United States and supply-chain disruptions related to the Japanese disasters in March.
The Bank now estimates that these supply disruptions will subtract roughly three-quarters of a percentage point from GDP growth in Canada in the second quarter, a slightly larger impact than projected in the April Report.
The boost to activity in the second half of 2011 as conditions normalize is, correspondingly, expected to be slightly greater than previously anticipated.
The level of real GDP has been marginally lower in the first half of 2011 than the Bank had projected, suggesting a greater degree of slack than previously anticipated.
However, some indicators of capacity pressures suggest that the economy may be operating closer to its production potential.
The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap for the second quarter of 2011 stood at -0.7 per cent.
In addition, the Bank's summer Business Outlook Survey finds that the proportion of firms indicating that they would have difficulty responding to an unexpected increase in demand has risen above its historical average.
Nonetheless, the proportion of firms reporting significant capacity constraints remains low.
Moreover, key labour market indicators, such as the unemployment rate, average hours worked and the proportion of involuntary part-time workers, as well as the below-average proportion of firms facing labour shortages as reported in the Bank's survey, point to significant excess capacity.
On balance, the Bank judges that the economy was operating at slightly less than 1 per cent below its production capacity in the second quarter of 2011, roughly the same degree of slack as the Bank had anticipated in April.
Core CPI inflation rose to an average of 1.7 per cent in April and May, from 1.3 per cent in the first quarter, partly because of the passing of a number of transitory factors that had been dampening it.
In addition, the gradual pass-through of the surge in world agricultural commodity prices has resulted in a significant rise in core food prices.
While these increases have been consistent with expectations at the time of the April Report, price developments for many services have been slightly firmer than expected, although wage growth has remained modest.
The prices of semi-durable goods have also been slightly firmer than expected.
The gap between prices in Canada and the United States for a number of durable and semi-durable goods, adjusted for the exchange rate, remains wide.
The increase in total CPI inflation from 2.6 per cent in the first quarter to an average of 3.5 per cent in April and May has been larger than anticipated in the April Report, owing to a greater-than-expected rise in Canadian gasoline prices, as well as firmer-than-expected core inflation.
Measures of short-term inflation expectations remain consistent with earlier sharp increases in world commodity prices and their observed effects on total CPI.
The July Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation was 3.0 per cent in 2011 and very close to the target in 2012 (2.1 per cent).
Expectations for average inflation over the next two years, as reported in the Bank's summer Business Outlook Survey, remain concentrated within the 1 to 3 per cent control range, with a majority of firms continuing to expect inflation to be in the upper half of the range, consistent with the recent rapid increase in commodity prices and in the total CPI.
Market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations remain consistent with the 2 per cent inflation-control target.
Despite rising global risk aversion, financial conditions in Canada have remained very stimulative in recent months, providing important support to the economic expansion.
Effective borrowing costs for households and businesses have edged down further, and remain very low by historical standards.
As well, there has been an additional easing in access to financing for Canadian firms.
Following a gradual slowing through much of 2010, the growth of household credit picked up markedly in the first quarter of 2011.
With the passing of these temporary factors, the pace of expansion of household credit has recently moderated somewhat.
The Bank's Senior Loan Officer Survey for the second quarter of 2011 indicated a further easing in the lending conditions faced by a wide range of firms, reflecting heightened competition among lending institutions and from capital markets, as well as a more favourable domestic economic outlook.
Results from the summer Business Outlook Survey also point to a further easing in credit conditions for firms of all sizes.
Investor demand for risky assets in Canada has generally remained strong, partly reflecting the low level of government bond yields.
Accordingly, credit spreads have stayed narrow and corporate bond issuance in Canada has been relatively strong, although issuance has declined in recent weeks amid increased global risk aversion.
The Canadian S&P/TSX Composite Index has retreated from its peak earlier in 2011, along with other major world stock markets.
In response to favourable financing conditions and the robust ongoing recovery in business investment, growth in total business credit has remained fairly strong in recent months.
Growth in the broader M2++ aggregate has been edging up but remains below its historical average, continuing to suggest subdued inflation pressures ahead.
It has been volatile since the end of June, reflecting broader financial market developments.
The Bank's outlook for the Canadian economy is little changed from the April Report, with a generally moderate pace of expansion expected.
Following a rebound in the second half of 2011 related to the unwinding of supply disruptions, economic growth in Canada is expected to slow toward the economy's potential rate of growth over the projection horizon.
The Bank continues to expect that the rotation of aggregate demand in Canada away from household and government expenditures toward business fixed investment and net exports will persist over the projection horizon.
Relative to the April Report, growth in household spending is expected to be slightly firmer, while downward revisions to projected US demand and ongoing competitiveness challenges are expected to slow the improvement in Canada's net exports.
On an average annual basis, real GDP is projected to grow by 2.8 per cent in 2011 and 2.6 per cent in 2012, while growth in 2013 is expected to moderate to 2.1 per cent, with the economy operating at full capacity.
This growth profile implies a similar level of activity to that projected in the April Report, with the Bank continuing to expect the economy to return to full capacity in the middle of 2012.
As in April, the Bank expects growth in household expenditures to moderate over the projection horizon relative to the rapid pace throughout the recovery, in line with some moderation in the growth of personal disposable income.
The high level of consumer indebtedness is also anticipated to restrain the growth of household spending, with the savings rate expected to decline only modestly and the upward trajectory in the ratio of household debt to income projected to moderate.
On balance, the projection for household spending is slightly higher than in the April Report, although the Bank continues to expect household expenditures as a share of the economy to decline gradually toward its historical average.
The Bank continues to project that the contribution of government spending to real GDP growth will be negative through the balance of 2011 and into 2012, consistent with the previously announced unwinding of fiscal stimulus.
The profile for government expenditures has been adjusted from the April projection, incorporating the latest information from all levels of government as well as reflecting historical revisions to the national accounts.
Business fixed investment is expected to continue to rise rapidly over the projection horizon, with considerable scope remaining to offset the unusually sharp decline experienced during the recession.
The buoyant outlook for investment reflects the solid financial positions of Canadian firms, favourable credit conditions, high commodity prices and the strong Canadian dollar, as well as the impetus to improve productivity amid heightened pressures to become more competitive.
The Bank continues to expect an improvement in net exports over the projection horizon as exports recover with rising external demand and import growth slows along with the moderation in the growth of domestic demand.
However, the recovery in exports is likely to be modest, given Canada's ongoing competitiveness challenges, which stem primarily from the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar.
The expected recovery in Canadian exports over the medium term is now projected to be even more muted than in the April Report, reflecting negative revisions to the projected pace of US demand growth, although the growth in exports in the second half of 2011 is likely to be temporarily boosted by the unwinding of supply-chain disruptions.
The Bank continues to expect that the expansion in imports will be underpinned by solid growth in business investment, because of its typically high import content and, more generally, by greater import penetration due to the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar.
Net exports will continue to be sensitive to currency movements and the expected recovery in productivity growth, as well as to the prospects for external demand.
The Bank expects core inflation to remain around 2 per cent over the projection horizon as excess supply in the economy is slowly absorbed and inflation expectations remain well anchored.
Transitory factors are expected to push core inflation slightly above 2 per cent on a temporary basis.
As in the April Report, the Bank expects that the dampening effects of HST-related tax refunds passed on by businesses a year ago will fade in coming quarters.
The lagged effects of higher prices for agricultural commodities on food prices in Canada are also expected to put further upward pressure on core inflation through the second half of 2011, with this impact unwinding through 2012, thus contributing to the stabilization of core inflation at 2 per cent.
Slightly firmer prices for core services are expected to have a more persistent effect on core inflation.
The high level of the Canadian dollar is expected to continue to help dampen inflationary pressures.
In coming quarters, total CPI inflation is projected to fall from its recently elevated level, partly because of the unwinding of the impact of the introduction of the HST in July 2010 on the year-over-year rate of inflation.
In addition, energy prices have fallen from their peak, and are projected to be relatively stable going forward, rising only modestly.
As a result, total CPI inflation is still expected to converge to core inflation at the 2 per cent target by the middle of 2012.
Chart 29 and Chart 30 depict the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the third quarter of 2011 to the end of 2013.
Although the global outlook remains broadly unchanged, global risks have intensified, most notably in Europe.
With very stimulative financing conditions, borrowing could grow faster than income.
The economy's production potential could be lower than estimated.
While labour market indicators still point to significant slack, some indicators of capacity pressures suggest that the economy may be operating closer to its production potential.
The three main downside risks to inflation in Canada relate to sovereign debt concerns in Europe, headwinds from the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar and the possibility that growth in household spending could be weaker than projected.
Acute fiscal and financial strains in Europe could trigger a generalized retrenchment from risk-taking and severe dislocations in global funding markets.
The global economy has slowed markedly as several downside risks to the projection outlined in July have been realized.
Financial market volatility has increased and there has been a generalized retrenchment from risk-taking across global markets.
The combination of ongoing deleveraging by banks and households, increased fiscal austerity, and declining business and consumer confidence is expected to restrain growth across the advanced economies.
The Bank now expects that the euro area - where these dynamics are most acute - will experience a brief recession.
The Bank's base-case scenario assumes that the euro-area crisis will be contained, although this assumption is clearly subject to downside risks.
In the United States, diminished household confidence, tighter financial conditions and increased fiscal drag are expected to result in weak real GDP growth through the first half of 2012, before growth strengthens gradually thereafter.
In Japan, reconstruction activity is projected to boost growth over 2012-13, although Japan's economy will be constrained by reduced global activity and the sharp appreciation of the yen.
Growth in China and other emerging-market economies is projected to moderate to a more sustainable pace in response to weaker external demand and the lagged effects of past policy tightening.
These developments, combined with recent declines in commodity prices, are expected to dampen global inflationary pressures.
The outlook for the Canadian economy has weakened since July, with the significantly less-favourable external environment affecting Canada through financial, confidence and trade channels.
Although Canadian growth rebounded in the third quarter with the unwinding of temporary factors, underlying economic momentum has slowed and is expected to remain modest through the middle of next year.
Domestic demand is expected to remain the principal driver of growth over the projection horizon, though at a more subdued pace than previously anticipated.
Household expenditures are now projected to grow relatively modestly as lower commodity prices and heightened volatility in financial markets weigh on the incomes, wealth and confidence of Canadian households.
Business fixed investment is still expected to grow solidly in response to very stimulative financial conditions and heightened competitive pressures, although it will be dampened by the weaker and more uncertain global economic environment.
Net exports are expected to remain a source of weakness, owing to sluggish foreign demand and ongoing competitiveness challenges, including the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar.
Overall, the Bank expects that growth in Canada will be slow through mid-2012 before picking up as the global economic environment improves, uncertainty dissipates and confidence increases.
The Bank projects that the economy will expand by 2.1 per cent in 2011, 1.9 per cent in 2012 and 2.9 per cent in 2013.
The weaker economic outlook implies greater and more persistent economic slack than previously anticipated, with the Canadian economy now expected to return to full capacity by the end of 2013.
As a result, core inflation is expected to be slightly softer than previously expected, declining through 2012 before returning to 2 per cent by the end of 2013.
The projection for total CPI inflation has also been revised down, reflecting the recent reversal of earlier sharp increases in world energy prices as well as modestly weaker core inflation.
Total CPI inflation is expected to trough around 1 per cent by the middle of 2012 before rising with core inflation to the 2 per cent target by the end of 2013, as excess supply in the economy is slowly absorbed.
Several significant upside and downside risks are present in the inflation outlook for Canada.
The three main upside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the possibility of stronger-than-expected inflationary pressures in the global economy, stronger momentum in Canadian household spending, and the possibility of a faster-than-expected rebound in business and consumer confidence, due to more decisive policy action in the major advanced economies.
The three main downside risks to inflation in Canada relate to sovereign debt and banking concerns in Europe, the increased probability of a recession in the US economy, and the possibility that growth in household spending could be weaker than projected.
Reflecting all of these factors, on 25 October, the Bank maintained the target for the overnight rate at 1 per cent.
With the target interest rate near historic lows and the financial system functioning well, there is considerable monetary policy stimulus in Canada.
The Bank will continue to monitor carefully economic and financial developments in the Canadian and global economies, together with the evolution of risks, and set monetary policy consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target over the medium term.
The global economy has slowed markedly as several of the downside risks to the projection outlined in the July Monetary Policy Report have been realized.
Acute fiscal and financial strains in Europe and concerns about the strength of global economic activity have led to increased financial market volatility, reduced business and consumer confidence, and a generalized retrenchment from risk-taking.
In this context, pressures in the European banking sector have escalated, contributing to a sharp slowdown in economic growth in the euro area.
In the United States, revisions to national accounts data indicate that the recent recession was deeper than previously reported, and the recovery shallower.
Growth in many emerging-market economies has also moderated, although it remains relatively robust.
Commodity prices have declined significantly in response to diminished prospects for global economic growth.
Consistent with historical experience following severe financial crises, the recovery in advanced economies is projected to continue at a much slower pace than is typical in post-recession periods.
In the euro area, economic growth is expected to remain weak over the projection horizon.
Even though the Bank's projection assumes that steps are taken to contain the crisis, growth is expected to be restrained by ongoing bank and sovereign deleveraging and only a gradual recovery in confidence.
Repair of household balance sheets and an anticipated tightening in fiscal policy are also expected to weigh on real GDP growth in the United States.
Growth in emerging-market economies is projected to decelerate in response to lower demand from advanced economies.
Owing to the lack of exchange rate adjustment and limited progress in rebalancing global demand, the weak and uneven nature of the current recovery is expected to persist.
Global economic growth has weakened considerably in recent months, reflecting a sharp slowing in activity in the United States and the euro area.
The pace of growth in emerging-market economies has also decelerated, albeit from relatively high levels.
Real GDP growth in the euro area fell to 0.6 per cent in the second quarter, well below expectations at the time of the July Report, and recent indicators point to continued weakness in the third quarter.
Consumer and business confidence, which were already low in the periphery, have also dropped markedly in the core economies.
Euro-area banks are restricting access to credit as they attempt to delever.
Slowing economic activity, reduced confidence and heightened financial stress are becoming mutually reinforcing as concerns regarding the fiscal sustainability of peripheral Europe spread to some of the core economies, increasing worries about the stability of the banking system.
In the United States, information released since the July Report points to a much lower path for US real GDP in recent years than earlier estimates had suggested.
While the fundamental forces and dynamics affecting the US economy have not changed, their magnitudes now appear much larger.
The July revisions to the national accounts data indicate that the US recession was deeper and the recovery shallower than previously reported.
Real GDP growth has slowed from an annual rate of roughly 2.5 per cent in the second half of 2010 to less than 1.0 per cent in the first half of 2011.
Growth is estimated to have improved in the third quarter of 2011, supported by the recent decline in commodity prices and the restoration of supply chains following the natural disasters in Japan.
However, efforts to repair household balance sheets in the United States are exerting a much stronger restraining effect on domestic demand than previously anticipated.
Recent adverse shocks to US household finances and falling consumer confidence have led to a marked slowing in US consumption spending and have rendered the process of balance-sheet repair even more challenging.
In addition, household wealth has been hit by recent declines in equity prices.
Housing demand has remained weak and, together with the elevated stock of vacant homes, has depressed residential construction.
A negative cycle is under way in which persistently high rates of mortgage delinquency are creating stress for financial institutions, leading to greater caution in the extension of credit and exacerbating the weakness in housing demand.
This will gradually dissipate as households repair their balance sheets.
US economic activity has been supported through this difficult period by strength in business investment and exports.
Business investment in equipment and software has been underpinned by the low cost of capital and healthy corporate balance sheets.
However, investment in non-residential structures has remained subdued in view of continuing excess capacity.
US exports have benefited from solid demand in emerging-market economies and from enhanced competitiveness stemming from robust productivity growth and the past depreciation of the US dollar.
Real GDP in Japan contracted by 2.1 per cent in the second quarter, but incoming data point to positive growth in the third quarter, driven by the restoration of supply chains and the reconstruction of infrastructure following the natural disasters in March.
However, growth in exports, which had been an important contributing factor to GDP growth in earlier periods, has stalled in the past few months.
Owing to concerns that a rising yen would weaken export growth even further, Japanese authorities intervened in foreign exchange markets at the beginning of August to limit the appreciation of the currency.
In China, growth in real GDP moderated to 9.1 per cent in the third quarter, largely in response to the past tightening in monetary policy.
The growth of consumption has slowed somewhat, but real estate investment remains robust, boosted by a government program to build 10 million social housing units in each of 2011 and 2012.
Moderating food prices have contributed to a slight decline in inflation, but price pressures remain elevated, with consumer prices rising by 6.1 percent on a year-over-year basis in September - well in excess of the government's target of 4 per cent.
Commodity prices have declined significantly since the July Report in response to the deteriorating outlook for global economic growth, although they remain high by historical standards.
Energy prices have registered the sharpest drop, while prices for non-energy commodities have decreased more modestly, owing to tight near-term supply conditions for agricultural commodities.
Although underlying inflation pressures in many emerging-market economies remain a source of concern, authorities are reluctant to tighten monetary conditions further, given the declining prospects for global growth.
In the major advanced economies, in contrast, underlying inflation pressures remain contained, reflecting continuing excess supply conditions.
Policy interest rates in these economies have stayed at or close to historically low levels, and a number of central banks have undertaken additional policy actions to ease monetary conditions or reduce financial stress.
The US Federal Reserve has continued on its path of quantitative easing, modifying its balance-sheet operations in an effort to put downward pressure on US long-term and mortgage interest rates.
The Bank of Japan and the Bank of England have expanded their asset-purchase programs.
Markets have experienced significant volatility, triggered by a reassessment of the prospects for global economic growth, as well as heightened worries over debt sustainability in the euro area and uncertainty over the direction of fiscal policy in the United States.
The already negative tone in financial markets has been exacerbated by numerous credit-rating downgrades of sovereigns and global financial institutions.
These developments have reinforced concerns about the fiscal situations in many major economies and the political challenges that must be overcome.
As a result, investment flows have shifted toward safer and more-liquid assets.
Government bond yields in a number of advanced economies, where markets are most liquid and which are perceived to be better credit risks, have fallen sharply, with 10-year yields trading at or near all-time record lows.
In addition, safe-haven currencies have appreciated.
The prices of riskier assets, in contrast, have declined significantly.
Global equity indexes have decreased by about 5 to 20 per cent since the last Report, with an even larger decline reported in financial sub-indexes.
Many euro-area sovereigns are facing rising funding costs, and European banks have experienced severe funding pressures and increased costs to insure against default risk, owing to concerns about their exposures to the sovereign debt of euro-area peripheral countries.
Conditions in corporate credit markets have also deteriorated.
Corporate spreads have widened, and corporate issuance has fallen to a fraction of the levels seen earlier in the year.
Liquidity in secondary credit markets has been extremely limited, and short-term trading has often been driven by headlines regarding the European situation.
Global economic growth is projected to slow to slightly above 3 per cent in 2012, well below expectations at the time of the July Report.
Ongoing deleveraging by households, banks and governments, declining confidence, and the sovereign debt crisis in Europe are expected to restrain growth in the advanced economies.
Growth in emerging-market economies is projected to slow in response to weakening external demand and the lagged effects of past policy tightening.
In 2013, global economic growth is expected to pick up as confidence improves and corrective policy measures expected to be taken in Europe and elsewhere begin to have an effect.
The Bank's base-case scenario assumes that the crisis in the euro area will be contained and that additional actions will be undertaken to ensure debt sustainability, strengthen banks' capital buffers, and create a larger and more effective fund to stabilize the funding costs of affected sovereigns at sustainable levels.
This assumption is clearly subject to downside risks.
Financial strains, bank deleveraging, fiscal austerity measures and declining confidence lead nonetheless to a mild recession in the euro area beginning at the end of 2011.
The weakened state of banks' balance sheets is projected to constrain both consumption and investment growth, with the effects on investment being particularly significant, owing to heavy corporate reliance on bank funding.
A modest recovery is expected to start in mid-2012, when credit conditions begin to improve.
Real GDP growth is projected to gather some momentum in 2013 as the benefits from the reforms put in place to address the debt crisis begin to materialize and confidence gradually improves.
Real GDP growth in the United States is projected to remain weak through the first half of 2012, averaging about 1 1/4 per cent, or around levels at which the probability of recession increases.
However, US economic growth is expected to strengthen gradually, starting in the second half of 2012, in response to an easing in monetary conditions and an improvement in the situation in Europe.
Consistent with the historical experience following severe financial crises elsewhere, growth is projected to remain quite modest.
GDP growth in 2013 rebounds to 3.3 per cent, but the level of real GDP by the end of the projection horizon is still well below that anticipated in the July Report.
Fiscal consolidation in the United States is expected to exert an important drag on growth of about 1 percentage point in 2012 and 2 percentage points in 2013.
This is slightly larger than anticipated in the July Report, reflecting new measures to restrain government spending adopted as part of the agreement to raise the US debt ceiling.
The Bank's projection does not include any of the new fiscal stimulus measures proposed by the US administration in the American Jobs Act.
If fully implemented, these measures could add as much as 1.3 percentage points to growth in 2012 through tax reductions and increases in expenditures and transfers, but would subtract close to 1 percentage point from growth in 2013, when many of the proposed measures begin to expire.
Growth in US consumption is expected to be held back by ongoing elevated savings rates and a subdued recovery in labour market conditions, as well as the drag from fiscal consolidation, which will lower household disposable income.
An easing in financial conditions in response to the US Federal Reserve's balance-sheet operations is projected to provide some offsetting support.
The level of residential construction is expected to remain weak over 2012-13, with a gradual recovery beginning only around the middle of 2012.
Growth in the construction of non-residential structures is projected to continue at a modest pace through 2013, supported by a gradual easing in lending conditions.
Exports and business investment in equipment and software should continue to provide important support for US economic growth over the coming years.
After some slowing during the first half of 2012, business investment is expected to grow robustly over the remainder of the projection horizon, boosted by the low cost of capital and gradually improving economic conditions.
In 2012, export growth is constrained by weakening global demand, but is projected to strengthen in 2013 in tandem with the recovery in the global economy.
Reconstruction activities are expected to boost economic growth in Japan over 2012-13.
Growth is projected to be significantly weaker than was anticipated in the July Report, however, owing to reduced prospects for global economic growth and the recent sharp appreciation of the yen.
Real GDP growth in China and other emerging-market economies is expected to moderate to a more sustainable pace over the projection horizon in response to slowing growth in advanced economies.
At the same time, a gradual rotation away from exports and toward stronger consumption is projected, facilitated by structural policies and a modest appreciation of the real effective exchange rates in China and other emerging-market economies.
These developments, combined with lower commodity prices, are expected to dampen inflation pressures.
Commodity prices are projected to remain roughly 10 per cent below the levels anticipated at the time of the July Report.
Steady demand from emerging-market economies and limited increases in supply should nevertheless keep prices at levels that are relatively high by historical standards.
Prices for non-energy commodities should stay close to current levels through 2013, with a rebound in metals prices offsetting a projected easing in the prices of agricultural products.
Based on the latest futures curve, prices for West Texas Intermediate crude oil are expected to move within a range of US$85 to US$89 per barrel until the end of 2013, down from a range of US$100 to US$103 at the time of the July Report.
According to the latest futures curve, natural gas prices are projected to increase by about 1 per cent in 2012 and 13 per cent in 2013 as environmental standards encourage greater use of natural gas in the United States.
The economic outlook in Canada has weakened, reflecting the substantially downgraded outlook for the global economy.
The weaker and more uncertain global economic and financial environment will affect the Canadian economy through financial, confidence and trade channels.
As a result, compared with expectations in the July Report, the Bank now anticipates a more subdued profile for both final domestic demand and exports over the projection horizon.
Overall, the Bank now projects slow growth in real GDP in Canada through mid-2012.
Economic growth is expected to improve thereafter, in line with an improved global environment as uncertainty dissipates and confidence recovers.
The weaker economic outlook implies greater and more persistent economic slack than anticipated in the July Report.
As a result, core inflation is projected to be slightly softer than previously expected, declining through 2012 before returning to 2 per cent by the end of 2013.
The projection for total CPI inflation has also been revised down, reflecting a lower profile for world energy prices, as well as modestly weaker core inflation.
Accordingly, total CPI inflation is expected to decline from its recent peak of over 3 per cent to around 1 per cent by mid-2012, before rising with core inflation to the 2 per cent target as excess supply in the economy is slowly absorbed.
Economic growth in Canada stalled in the second quarter, owing largely to temporary factors.
While the unwinding of these factors has led to a rebound in economic activity in the third quarter, the underlying momentum in the economy has slowed.
Real GDP declined at an annual rate of 0.4 per cent in the second quarter, a weaker outcome than had been expected in the July Report, owing to a substantial deterioration in net exports.
Exports declined markedly in the second quarter, reflecting softer foreign demand and ongoing challenges to Canadian competitiveness, as well as important temporary factors.
These factors included the anticipated adverse impact of supply-chain disruptions resulting from the disasters in Japan earlier in the year, as well as other unanticipated disruptions that constrained activities in the energy sector.
Imports continued to grow robustly in the second quarter, reflecting large increases in Canadian business investment in machinery and equipment and in inventories.
Growth in final domestic demand remained solid in the second quarter, with all its major components contributing to the increase.
Consumer spending picked up after a very weak first quarter.
The pace of growth in consumption remained subdued compared with that registered during the recovery, however, reflecting the adjustment to higher food and energy prices, as well as slower growth in personal disposable income.
Growth in residential investment fell off sharply in the second quarter following a large increase in the first quarter, when some activity was pulled forward in advance of changes to the regulations for mortgage insurance.
Business fixed investment continued to recover strongly in the second quarter, including a temporary boost from the purchase of a large natural gas platform.
Government expenditures, incorporating spending from all levels of government, also continued to contribute to real GDP growth.
The Bank estimates that economic growth rebounded to 2.0 per cent in the third quarter as the temporary factors that held back net exports in the second quarter unwound.
Growth is expected to slip back in the fourth quarter, however, more accurately reflecting the underlying growth in the economy in an environment of lower confidence and heightened uncertainty.
Potential output growth is expected to increase from 1.6 per cent in 2011 to 2.1 per cent in 2013.
The projection horizon has also been extended to 2014, when the growth of potential output is expected to be 2.2 per cent.
As a result of the strong and sustained recovery in investment spending, as well as efficiency gains, trend productivity is projected to improve as Canadian firms strive to adopt best practices in the face of competitive pressures.
At the same time, demographic forces will continue to reduce the trend rate of growth of labour input.
Various indicators suggest greater economic slack in recent months.
The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap continues to suggest a more modest degree of slack, but has also widened noticeably from -0.5 per cent in the first quarter to -1.0 per cent in the third quarter.
Key labour market indicators, such as the unemployment rate and the proportion of involuntary part-time workers, as well as the below-average proportion of firms reporting labour shortages in the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey , point to material excess capacity.
In addition, the Bank's autumn survey found that the proportion of firms indicating that they would have difficulty responding to an unexpected increase in demand had diminished noticeably in comparison with the previous survey, although it remained near its historical average.
On balance, the Bank judges that the economy was operating at about 1 1/4 per cent below its production capacity in the third quarter of 2011, a substantially larger degree of slack than the Bank had anticipated in July.
As anticipated in the July Report, core CPI inflation rose to 1.9 per cent in the third quarter from 1.6 per cent in the second quarter.
Part of this increase reflects the dissipation of the HST effect on year-over-year core inflation.
Core food price inflation was somewhat lower than had been anticipated in the July Report, but the impact on core inflation was offset by slightly larger than expected increases in the prices of some core services and clothing.
Underlying inflation pressures remain contained, reflecting the persistence of excess supply in the economy and modest growth in labour compensation, along with the dampening effect from the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
Total CPI inflation fell to 3.0 per cent in the third quarter from 3.4 per cent in the second quarter, as the impact of the introduction of the HST in July 2010 on the year-over-year rate of inflation unwound.
The drop in total CPI inflation was somewhat smaller than the Bank had projected in the July Report, owing largely to the firmness in gasoline prices despite recent declines in world energy prices, which in turn partly reflects an unusual divergence in the prices of different types of crude oil.
The October Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation was 1.9 per cent in 2012.
As reported in the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey, 88 per cent of firms expect average inflation over the next two years to remain within the 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range.
Market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations also remain consistent with the 2 per cent inflation-control target.
The aggregate supply and price of credit to businesses and households in Canada remain very stimulative, providing important ongoing support to the economic expansion.
Canadian banks remain well positioned to lend, owing to their strong financial positions and relatively low funding costs.
Results from the Business Outlook Survey suggest that the terms and conditions for firms obtaining financing from financial institutions have eased further in recent months, particularly for small and medium-sized businesses.
This was consistent with the Bank's Senior Loan Officer Survey for the third quarter of 2011 , which also indicated a further easing in lending conditions, mainly reflecting competition among lenders.
Overall financial conditions in Canada have tightened slightly since the July Report, however, as conditions in capital markets have deteriorated.
Increased risk aversion, heightened volatility and weaker growth expectations across global markets have weighed on capital market conditions in recent months.
While Canadian government bond yields have declined substantially, corporate spreads have widened and market access has tightened for less-creditworthy borrowers.
In addition, the S&P/TSX Composite Index has fallen by more than 15 per cent from its peak in April 2011.
As a result, the volume of bond and equity issuance has diminished noticeably compared with earlier in the year.
Reflecting the ongoing recovery in business investment, growth in total business credit has remained solid in recent months.
As anticipated, the growth of household credit has slowed to a rate below its historical average in recent months with the passing of the temporary factors that boosted the demand for residential mortgage credit in the first quarter.
These factors include the lagged effects of the surge in sales of existing homes in the fourth quarter of last year, as well as some pulling forward of activity related to changes to mortgage insurance regulations.
Growth in the narrow monetary aggregates has rebounded in recent months, implying some reintensification of liquidity preference as uncertainty has risen.
Growth in the broader M2++ aggregate has, however, remained moderate in recent months, continuing to suggest subdued inflation pressures ahead.
The Canadian dollar has averaged around 99 cents US since the September fixed announcement date, which is below the level of 103 cents US assumed in the July Report.
The Canadian-dollar effective exchange rate index has depreciated by an amount similar to the exchange rate with the United States.
The Bank's base-case projection incorporates the following key assumptions: a Canada/US exchange rate averaging 99 cents US; energy prices in line with recent futures prices; prices for non-energy commodities remaining at elevated levels; and heightened uncertainty and relatively volatile global financial conditions persisting through mid-2012, before improving gradually.
The Bank now sees the Canadian economy growing slowly through mid-2012, after which growth is projected to improve.
This projection assumes that the crisis in Europe will be contained, leading to reduced uncertainty and a gradual return of confidence.
On an average annual basis, real GDP is projected to grow by 2.1 per cent in 2011 and 1.9 per cent in 2012, while growth in 2013 is expected to pick up temporarily above the rate of potential (to 2.9 per cent).
This growth profile implies that the economy is now projected to return to full capacity by the end of 2013.
This base-case projection for the Canadian economy is weaker than in the July Report, with the significantly less-favourable external environment affecting Canada through financial, confidence and trade channels.
Domestic demand is expected to remain the principal driver of growth over the projection horizon, although at a more subdued pace than previously anticipated.
Household expenditures are now projected to grow relatively modestly, as lower commodity prices and heightened volatility in financial markets weigh on the incomes, wealth and confidence of Canadian households.
The Bank expects relatively modest growth in household expenditures over the projection horizon, compared with both the rapid pace seen during the recovery and the outlook presented in the July Report.
Lower commodity prices and heightened volatility in financial markets stemming from the weaker and more uncertain global economic outlook are projected to weigh on the wealth and confidence of Canadian households, resulting in a higher savings rate amid more moderate growth in personal disposable income than was projected in July.
As a result, the Bank continues to expect a moderation in the upward trajectory of the household debt-to-income ratio.
In this context, the Bank also continues to expect household expenditures as a share of the economy to decline gradually toward its historical average.
As in July, business fixed investment is expected to continue to grow solidly over the projection horizon, with considerable scope remaining to make up for the unusually sharp decline experienced during the recession.
The outlook for investment continues to be underpinned by the solid financial positions of Canadian firms, favourable credit conditions and relatively high commodity prices, as well as the impetus to improve productivity in response to heightened pressures to become more competitive.
However, a somewhat more subdued profile than had been anticipated for the growth of business fixed investment is expected over the near term, reflecting the effects on confidence from the uncertain economic outlook, as well as lower but still elevated commodity prices.
This projection for business investment is consistent with the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey, which showed that investment intentions remain strong, albeit slightly less so than in previous surveys, as some firms indicated a more cautious approach to their capital spending plans and a possible postponement of projects, given the uncertainty in the current environment.
The Bank's base-case projection assumes that the contribution of government spending to real GDP growth will be negative through the balance of 2011 and into 2012, consistent with the previously announced unwinding of fiscal stimulus.
The profile for government expenditures has been adjusted upward from the July Report, incorporating the latest national accounts estimates and information from all levels of government.
Canadian exports are now projected to be weaker than anticipated in the July Report, owing to the significantly weaker outlook for foreign demand.
Imports are expected to grow modestly over the projection horizon, largely reflecting the adverse consequences of the unsettled global economic and financial environment for domestic demand in Canada.
Overall, net exports are expected to remain a source of weakness.
The Bank expects core inflation to remain close to 2 per cent in the near term, as anticipated in the July Report, before declining through 2012 as considerable economic slack persists and food price inflation slows.
Core inflation is then expected to return to 2 per cent by the end of 2013 as excess supply in the economy is slowly absorbed, the growth of labour compensation increases modestly and inflation expectations remain well anchored.
This profile for core inflation is slightly softer than was anticipated in the July Report, reflecting the weaker outlook for the Canadian economy.
Total CPI inflation is projected to continue to fall in coming quarters, reflecting the gradual impact on gasoline prices of lower oil prices.
Total CPI inflation is projected to drop to around 1 per cent by the middle of 2012 before rising with core inflation to the 2 per cent target by the end of 2013.
This return to target is somewhat later than had been anticipated in the July Report, owing to the downward revision to core inflation and to the lower profile assumed for world commodity prices.
Chart 32 and Chart 33 depict the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the fourth quarter of 2011 to the end of 2013.
The inflation outlook in Canada is subject to several significant risks.
In particular, the Bank's projection assumes that authorities in Europe are able to contain the ongoing crisis, although this assumption is clearly subject to downside risks.
The three main upside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the possibility of stronger-than-expected inflationary pressures in the global economy, stronger momentum in Canadian household spending, and the possibility of a faster-than-expected rebound in business and consumer confidence.
Global inflationary pressures could be more persistent than currently projected if growth in emerging-market economies does not decelerate to more sustainable levels or if potential output in advanced economies is lower than projected.
With very stimulative financing conditions, borrowing could grow at a faster pace than anticipated.
Uncertainty about the resolve of policy-makers to address challenges and mounting concern about future economic prospects are having a marked effect on global economic activity.
More decisive policy action in the major advanced economies than currently anticipated could lift confidence more rapidly than currently projected.
Failure to contain the crisis in Europe is the most serious risk facing the global and Canadian economies.
The effects on Canada through financial, confidence and trade channels would be substantial, given the size and importance of the euro area.
Economic growth in the United States through the first half of 2011 slowed to levels that in previous periods often preceded a recession.
A US recession would have material consequences for growth and inflation in Canada, given the tight trade and financial links between the two countries.
The sovereign debt crisis in Europe has intensified, conditions in international financial markets have tightened and risk aversion has risen.
The recession in Europe is now expected to be deeper and longer than the Bank had anticipated.
The Bank continues to assume that European authorities will implement sufficient measures to contain the crisis, although this assumption is clearly subject to downside risks.
In the United States, while the rebound in real GDP during the second half of 2011 was stronger than anticipated, the Bank expects the recovery will proceed at a more modest pace going forward, owing to ongoing household deleveraging, fiscal consolidation and the spillovers from Europe.
Chinese growth is decelerating, as expected, toward a more sustainable pace.
Commodity prices - with the exception of oil - are expected to be below the levels anticipated in October through 2013.
The Bank's overall outlook for the Canadian economy is little changed from October.
While the economy had more momentum than anticipated in the second half of 2011, the pace of growth going forward is expected to be more modest than previously envisaged, largely due to the external environment.
Prolonged uncertainty about the global economic and financial environment is likely to dampen the rate of growth of business investment, albeit to a still solid pace.
Net exports are expected to contribute little to growth, reflecting moderate foreign demand and ongoing competitiveness challenges, including the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar.
In contrast, very favourable financing conditions are expected to buttress consumer spending and housing activity.
Household expenditures are expected to remain high relative to GDP and the ratio of household debt to income is projected to rise further.
The Bank estimates that the economy grew by 2.4 per cent in 2011 and projects that it will grow by 2.0 per cent in 2012 and 2.8 per cent in 2013.
While the economy appears to be operating with less slack than previously assumed, given the more modest growth profile, the economy is only anticipated to return to full capacity by the third quarter of 2013, one quarter earlier than was expected in October.
The dynamics for inflation are similar to those anticipated in October, although the profile for inflation is marginally firmer.
Both total and core inflation are expected to moderate in 2012 and subsequently rise, reaching 2 per cent by the third quarter of 2013 as excess supply is slowly absorbed, labour compensation grows modestly and inflation expectations remain well-anchored.
The three main upside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the possibility of stronger-than-expected inflationary pressures in the global economy, stronger-than-expected growth in the US economy and stronger momentum in Canadian household spending.
The two main downside risks to inflation in Canada relate to sovereign debt and banking concerns in Europe and the possibility that growth in Canadian household spending could be weaker than projected.
Reflecting all of these factors, on 17 January, the Bank maintained the target for the overnight rate at 1 per cent.
The outlook for the global economy has deteriorated and uncertainty has increased since the October Monetary Policy Report.
The sovereign debt crisis in Europe and the associated pressures on the banking sector have intensified, and the global ramifications through financial, trade and confidence effects are expanding.
Conditions in international financial markets have tightened and risk aversion has increased, weighing on the prospects for global economic growth.
Limited progress in rebalancing world demand is also contributing to the global slowdown as deficient demand in the major advanced economies is not being sufficiently offset by increased demand from emerging-market economies.
Overall, global economic growth is projected to average roughly 3 per cent per year through 2013.
The Bank's base-case scenario assumes that European authorities will implement the measures required to contain the crisis, thus supporting a gradual recovery in economic growth beginning in late 2012.
In the United States, economic conditions have improved in recent months, with better-than-anticipated growth in real GDP in the second half of 2011 and some recovery in consumer confidence.
Nonetheless, growth in US economic activity is expected to be relatively modest through 2013, owing to ongoing household deleveraging, fiscal consolidation and negative spillover effects from the European crisis.
Growth in emerging-market economies has slowed, as expected, and is projected to moderate further toward a more sustainable - yet still robust - pace, in response to past tightening in domestic monetary policy and weaker global demand.
Declines in commodity prices in the second half of last year and decreasing momentum in the global economy have begun to dampen inflation pressures.
Faced with subdued prospects for growth and diminishing inflation pressures, central banks in some advanced economies have provided additional monetary stimulus by lowering policy interest rates or engaging in further quantitative easing.
They have also adopted additional measures to provide liquidity support to the financial system.
Central banks in a number of emerging-market economies have also begun to loosen monetary policy, reversing earlier policy tightening.
Tensions in euro-area government debt markets have escalated since the October Report.
Bond spreads in some of the region's largest economies have risen, and yields for most of the peripheral sovereigns have reached post-euro record highs.
In contrast, yields on government bonds in the United States, Germany and a number of other developed economies have continued to fall as investors shift toward safer and more-liquid assets.
Conditions in global short-term bank funding markets have generally deteriorated because of developments in Europe.
In particular, most European banks have been shut out of unsecured term-funding markets in light of their significant exposure to euro-area sovereign debt, large recapitalization needs and major funding requirements.
As a result, the European Central Bank has provided increased liquidity to the European banking system against an expanded range of eligible collateral for periods of up to three years.
European banks have also experienced severe difficulty accessing US-dollar funds to finance their foreign-denominated assets.
To alleviate these funding pressures, existing arrangements for temporary US-dollar liquidity swaps between the US Federal Reserve and five major central banks have been extended, and the rate on these arrangements has been reduced.
As a contingency measure, these central banks have also agreed to establish a network of temporary bilateral liquidity swap arrangements so that liquidity can be provided in each jurisdiction, in any of their currencies, should market conditions warrant.
Rising investor anxiety has also affected other asset classes, albeit to a lesser extent.
Issuance of US corporate debt has rebounded since the October Report, although credit spreads have remained at wider levels than in the first half of 2011.
Global equity indexes are generally unchanged since late October but have shown considerable volatility, while European financial sub-indexes have declined significantly.
The deterioration in financial conditions is projected to persist for some time and to be increasingly transmitted to households and businesses through tighter borrowing conditions.
Financial conditions are expected to improve in 2013, supported by a rebound in global economic activity.
Recent economic indicators suggest that the euro area entered a recession in the fourth quarter of 2011.
Purchasing managers indexes have fallen below the threshold that divides growth from contraction, and confidence indicators have declined to levels typically seen during recessions.
Unemployment rates have started to rise (particularly in the periphery) from already-elevated levels.
Worsening economic conditions and increased borrowing costs have further weakened public finances and heightened concerns about bank balance sheets, even though a number of countries, including France, Italy and Spain, have adopted additional fiscal austerity and structural reform measures.
Faced with higher funding costs, European banks are restricting access to credit and charging higher interest rates on loans to businesses and households.
The adverse feedback loop between economic weakness, sovereign debt vulnerabilities and financial sector strains has thus become more entrenched.
Growing excess supply and declines in commodity prices are expected to dampen inflation pressures throughout most of the region.
In addition to measures aimed at supporting the financial system, the ECB has reduced its policy interest rate by 50 basis points, given the recent deterioration in economic activity.
In an effort to restore financial stability and confidence, European policy-makers have announced a number of initiatives, including increased private sector debt relief for Greece, a higher requirement for core Tier 1 capital ratios for banks, an earlier starting date for the European Stability Mechanism and a new Fiscal Compact to enhance fiscal discipline.
Economic prospects in the euro area have diminished further since the October Report and continue to be subject to a high degree of uncertainty.
The Bank's base-case projection assumes that European authorities will implement sufficient measures to contain the crisis, although this assumption is clearly subject to downside risks.
The ongoing recession is expected to last four quarters, resulting in a peak-to-trough decline in economic activity of close to 1.5 per cent.
Deteriorating financial conditions, bank deleveraging, fiscal consolidation and large negative confidence effects are expected to lead to a contraction in domestic demand in 2012, and growth in exports is projected to slow notably, owing to weaker global demand.
Economic outcomes are expected to vary widely across countries, however, with subdued growth in the core economies and a significant contraction in the periphery.
A modest recovery is expected to begin in the euro area in late 2012 as financing conditions begin to improve and confidence gradually recovers in response to the implementation of required policy measures and structural reforms.
Overall, relative to expectations in the October Report, the level of real GDP in the euro area is projected to be about 1 per cent lower at the end of 2013.
Recent economic activity in the United States has been stronger than anticipated.
Boosted by higher consumer spending and business investment, growth in real GDP rebounded to approximately 2.5 per cent in the second half of 2011.
Despite this positive surprise, the US recovery is expected to proceed at a more modest pace through 2012-13, with GDP growth averaging roughly 2 per cent per year, owing to headwinds from household deleveraging, fiscal consolidation and spillover effects from the European crisis.
US inflation pressures are projected to decrease in response to lower commodity prices and significant excess capacity.
As a result, the Federal Reserve is expected to maintain very accommodative monetary conditions.
Average annual GDP growth in the United States is projected to be slightly stronger in 2012 than anticipated in the October Report, mainly reflecting the rebound in growth in the second half of 2011 and reduced fiscal tightening.
Growth in 2013 is, however, expected to be significantly weaker.
Fiscal consolidation is projected to exert a drag on US real GDP growth amounting to about 0.8 percentage points in 2012 and about 2.5 percentage points in 2013.
The estimated impact in 2012 is smaller than was anticipated in the October Report, given improved prospects for the extension of the payroll tax cuts and unemployment insurance benefits that were scheduled to expire at the end of 2011.
The estimated drag in 2013 is larger, however, reflecting the impact of spending cuts that are assumed to take place during 2013.
Consumption growth has been supported in recent months by declines in commodity prices from the peaks observed a year ago, as well as by an improvement in consumer confidence and the increased availability of motor vehicles at US dealerships following the restoration of Japanese supply chains.
Growth in personal disposable income has remained weak, however, and the savings rate has fallen below the 5 per cent to 6 per cent range that the Bank expects will be needed to rebuild household balance sheets over the medium term.
US consumption is therefore expected to grow more modestly through 2013, as households renew efforts to repair their balance sheets in an environment of slowly improving labour market conditions and a persistent drag on incomes due to fiscal consolidation.
In addition, US banks are projected to tighten lending standards for consumers and businesses in reaction to increased funding costs related to the European crisis.
Restricted access to mortgage credit, together with an elevated inventory of foreclosed properties, is expected to keep the construction of new homes at a low level during most of 2012.
Tighter financial conditions and high vacancy rates should also limit growth in the construction of non-residential structures over this period.
A modest recovery is projected in both residential and non-residential construction toward the end of 2012, when financial conditions are expected to improve.
Exports and business investment in equipment and software are expected to continue to be important drivers of US economic growth over the projection horizon, although their contribution is projected to decrease somewhat in 2012.
Indeed, despite support from healthy corporate balance sheets, growth in business investment is expected to be constrained during the year by uncertainty over prospects for future growth, tightening financial conditions and low rates of resource utilization.
The pace of expansion in business investment is projected to improve in 2013 once these effects begin to dissipate.
Exports are projected to recover somewhat in 2013, however, in response to a gradual strengthening in external demand.
In reaction to the deceleration in economic activity, the Bank of Japan has further expanded the size of its asset-purchase program.
The central bank also intervened in foreign exchange markets at the end of October to limit the rise of the yen.
Real GDP growth in other advanced economies has slowed recently and is expected to be subdued in coming quarters, reflecting a weakening in external demand, declining household and business confidence, and continued drag from fiscal consolidation.
To counter the deterioration in economic conditions, monetary authorities in a number of countries, including Australia, Norway and Sweden, have lowered their policy interest rates.
Some economies with significant trade and financial links with the euro area could experience a recession.
Economic activity is expected to gather momentum toward the end of 2012, supported by a modest recovery in global growth and an improvement in confidence.
Economic growth in China decelerated to 9.1 per cent in the third quarter of 2011 in response to the past tightening in monetary policy and slowing external demand, especially from Europe, its most important trading partner.
Measures undertaken by the authorities to cool activity in the real estate sector have led to a softening in housing demand and a fall in property prices.
Moderating food prices contributed to a marked decline in the overall inflation rate to 4.1 per cent in December from a recent peak of 6.5 per cent in July.
With inflation pressures easing, Chinese authorities have shifted toward a more accommodative monetary policy stance and in December lowered the reserve requirement ratio for financial institutions by 50 basis points.
Growth in real GDP is nevertheless projected to moderate to around 8 per cent over 2012-13.
Structural reforms and a modest appreciation of the Chinese real exchange rate are expected to support a gradual rotation of demand away from investment and exports and toward consumption.
Despite some slowing due to a moderation in global demand, real GDP growth in other emerging-market economies is expected to remain relatively strong, supported by an easing in monetary policy.
This generally positive outlook is tempered, however, by the effects of increased risk aversion in global financial markets, which has led to capital outflows from some emerging-market economies, implying some tightening in credit conditions.
Growth is projected to slow particularly rapidly in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe, since their exports are directed principally toward Europe and their financial systems are heavily dominated by Western European banks.
Prices for non-energy commodities are essentially unchanged since the October Report.
While the prices of base metals and agricultural commodities have recovered somewhat in recent weeks following declines in late 2011, the prices of non-energy commodities are projected to fall in 2012 in reaction to diminished prospects for global economic growth, before partially recovering in 2013 when global demand conditions begin to improve.
This profile is lower over the projection horizon than had been anticipated in October.
Prices for West Texas Intermediate crude oil have rebounded to roughly US$100 per barrel, reflecting low global inventories and geopolitical tensions.
In addition, improved prospects for alleviating the inventory overhang in Cushing have led to a narrowing in the WTI-Brent spread to around US$10 per barrel from US$24 per barrel in October.
The latest futures curve suggests that WTI crude prices are projected to ease modestly through the end of 2013, although prices are expected to remain above the levels anticipated at the time of the October Report.
In contrast, natural gas prices in North America have fallen sharply in response to unseasonably warm weather, in an environment of persistent excess supply.
While prices are projected to recover through 2013 based on the latest futures curve, the level of natural gas prices is expected to remain lower through 2013 than anticipated in the October Report.
Despite the relatively subdued outlook for global economic growth, external demand for Canada's exports, as indicated by the foreign activity measure, is projected to grow moderately in 2012 and to pick up further in 2013 in response to an improvement in US residential construction and a rebound in the growth in US business investment.
Deteriorating economic conditions in Europe have a relatively modest impact on the foreign activity measure, given Canada's limited direct trade links with Europe, and will affect Canadian exports primarily through their spillover effects on US private domestic demand.
Nonetheless, the crisis in Europe is expected to have an indirect impact on the Canadian economy through its implications for financial conditions, confidence and global commodity prices.
The Bank of Canada's commodity price index has declined since the October Report, owing mainly to the impact of lower natural gas prices, which has more than offset the effect of the higher price of WTI oil.
Over the projection horizon, the BCPI is projected to increase as natural gas prices rise, despite expected declines in the prices of non-energy commodities and crude oil, but to remain somewhat below the levels anticipated in the October Report.
The Canadian dollar has averaged close to 98 cents US since the December fixed announcement date and is assumed to remain at this level over the projection horizon.
Although growth in the second half of 2011 was stronger than anticipated, the weaker external outlook is expected to affect the Canadian economy through confidence, financial and trade channels.
The Bank continues to expect that these headwinds will limit economic growth in Canada in 2012 to a modest pace, after which growth is projected to pick up as the global environment improves.
Private domestic demand is anticipated to remain the primary driver of growth in Canada throughout the projection horizon, with relatively weak global economic growth and competitiveness challenges, including the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar, continuing to restrain net exports.
Consistent with this outlook, the Bank continues to expect that the output gap will persist well into 2013.
Excess supply in the economy, together with moderate growth in labour compensation and dissipating pressures from commodity prices, is anticipated to result in a moderation in both total and core CPI inflation to below 2 per cent around mid-2012.
This moderation is projected to be slightly less pronounced than in the October Report, partly reflecting some expected persistence in the slightly firmer prices seen recently for a few goods, as well as a slightly higher assumed path for oil prices.
Despite the deterioration in global financial conditions, the aggregate supply and price of credit to businesses and households in Canada remain very stimulative, providing important ongoing support to the economic expansion.
Both the Bank's Senior Loan Officer Survey and the Business Outlook Survey suggested that business-lending conditions were little changed in the fourth quarter, after several quarters of sustained easing.
Household credit remains readily available at very low rates.
Canadian financial markets have been resilient in recent months.
The S&P/TSX Composite Index is roughly unchanged since the October Report, as are the relative prices of Canadian bank equities.
Canadian corporate spreads have narrowed marginally and issuance has been reasonably healthy, while government bond yields have declined sharply, with the 10-year nominal yield falling below 2 per cent for the first time.
This is partly due to sustained international demand for the debt of Canadian governments, banks and corporations, a sign that their credit quality is perceived to be high by global standards.
In this context, Canadian banks remain well positioned to lend, with ready access to relatively low-cost funding across the term structure.
This strong position has facilitated further declines in residential mortgage rates in recent weeks, potentially adding to the recent momentum in the growth of household credit, which picked up through the autumn as resale housing market activity strengthened.
In contrast, the growth of business credit slowed in recent months despite the persistence of historically low borrowing costs, consistent with a slowing in the growth of business investment amid heightened economic and financial uncertainty.
Growth in the narrow monetary aggregates continued to rebound in the fourth quarter, reflecting some increase in liquidity preference, with heightened uncertainty and low alternative rates of return likely playing a role.
Growth in the broad monetary aggregates has also picked up, albeit to a lesser extent, remaining consistent with relatively subdued inflation pressures ahead.
The level of real GDP in the fourth quarter of 2011 was 0.6 percentage points higher than the Bank had projected in the October Report.
Real GDP grew by 3.5 per cent in the third quarter of 2011 and is estimated to have risen by 2.0 per cent in the fourth quarter, above expectations in the October Report.
These stronger results reflect a larger rebound from the temporary factors that had restrained growth earlier in the year, as well as greater momentum in household expenditures in Canada and stronger-than-anticipated activity in the United States.
The resulting higher level of activity in Canada implies less slack in the economy than previously expected.
The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap has shown similar dynamics, narrowing to -0.7 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2011.
The Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey also showed that the proportion of firms that would have difficulty responding to an unexpected increase in demand edged up relative to the previous survey, remaining at a level close to its historical average.
In contrast, conditions in the labour market have softened in recent months.
The unemployment rate rose through the fourth quarter to reach 7.5 per cent in December, reflecting a decline in private sector employment, and average weekly hours worked have fallen.
While responses to the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey showed an increase in the proportion of firms reporting labour shortages, this proportion remains below its historical average.
On balance, the Bank judges that the economy was operating at roughly three-quarters of a per cent below its production capacity in the fourth quarter of 2011, a smaller degree of slack than the Bank had anticipated in the October Report.
The Bank expects modest growth in the Canadian economy in the first half of 2012, after which growth is projected to improve.
As in the October Report, this projection assumes that the crisis in Europe will be contained, eventually leading to reduced uncertainty and a gradual return of confidence.
On an average annual basis, growth in real GDP is projected to moderate from 2.4 per cent in 2011 to 2.0 per cent in 2012, before picking up temporarily above the rate of the economy's production potential to 2.8 per cent in 2013.
Private domestic demand, supported by accommodative domestic financial conditions, is expected to account for almost all of Canada's economic growth over the projection horizon.
This outlook for the Canadian economy is little changed from the October Report.
While the economy had more momentum in the second half of 2011 than anticipated, the projected pace of growth through 2012 is more modest than previously envisaged.
The weaker quarterly profile through 2012 reflects more persistent uncertainty about the global economic and financial outlook, which dampens private domestic demand through confidence and financial channels, and weaker projected growth in foreign activity, which depresses Canadian exports.
Household expenditures - the combination of consumer spending and residential investment - are now projected to grow at a steady pace through 2013, which is a stronger outlook than in the October Report.
The Bank continues to expect that consumption will grow at a rate slightly below the projected moderate growth in personal disposable income, resulting in a modest rise in the savings rate.
Residential investment is, however, now expected to remain strong, owing to its greater-than-anticipated momentum in the second half of last year and favourable mortgage financing conditions.
Confidence effects stemming from the weaker and more uncertain global outlook are projected to exert only a modest dampening effect on Canadian household spending.
Reflecting the upwardly revised profile for residential investment, household expenditures are now expected to remain high relative to GDP over the projection horizon and the ratio of household debt to income is projected to rise further.
The underlying pace of growth in business fixed investment has moderated in recent quarters from the robust rate seen through 2010 and early 2011, consistent with the adverse impact of heightened uncertainty on business confidence.
While this headwind is expected to persist in coming quarters, other fundamentals supporting business investment in Canada remain extremely favourable, particularly very stimulative financial conditions, solid Canadian corporate balance sheets, heightened competitive pressures and relatively high commodity prices.
Moreover, significant scope remains to make up for the unusually sharp decline in investment experienced during the recession.
As a result, the Bank expects relatively solid growth in business fixed investment through 2012, with some further strengthening in 2013 as confidence recovers.
This projection is consistent with the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey, which showed that investment intentions remain strongly positive despite indications from a number of firms that ongoing financial market volatility and global economic uncertainty had affected their investment plans.
The contribution of government spending to real GDP growth is assumed to be very modest over the projection horizon, in line with fiscal plans of federal and provincial governments to consolidate spending.
Foreign activity has been stronger in recent months than the Bank had previously expected, particularly in the United States, contributing to a more favourable outcome for Canadian exports.
Going forward, however, foreign activity is projected to grow slightly more slowly than anticipated in the October Report.
In addition, competitiveness remains a challenge for Canadian firms.
Unit labour costs in Canada have continued to increase relative to those in the United States over the past year, resulting in a cumulative gap of almost 40 per cent between the beginning of 2005 and the third quarter of 2011.
While the appreciation of the Canadian dollar accounts for most of this deterioration in competitiveness, about one-quarter of it is due to the productivity underperformance of Canadian firms.
Reflecting these competitiveness challenges and the moderate projected growth in foreign activity, the Bank expects relatively modest growth in Canadian exports through 2013.
With imports anticipated to grow at nearly the same pace, net exports contribute little to real GDP growth in Canada over the projection horizon, and the current account deficit remains significant at around 3 per cent of GDP.
Overall real GDP in Canada is projected to grow at a pace close to the estimated growth rate of potential output in 2012, leaving the current degree of economic slack to persist in coming quarters.
With the pace of real GDP growth subsequently picking up to a rate somewhat above potential, the economy is anticipated to return gradually to full capacity by the third quarter of 2013, one quarter earlier than expected in the October Report.
In this regard, the Canadian economy is projected to operate with slightly less slack throughout the projection horizon than indicated in the October base-case scenario, reflecting the slightly higher level of economic activity seen recently.
Core CPI inflation was 2.1 per cent in October and November, up from 1.9 per cent in the third quarter and 1.5 per cent in the first half of 2011.
As anticipated, this increase partly reflected the dissipation of the effect of the HST on year-over-year core inflation, as well as the lagged effects of higher world prices for agricultural products on the prices of food and clothing.
Despite higher core inflation, total CPI inflation has come down from its peak of 3.4 per cent in the second quarter of 2011, as anticipated, reflecting some moderation in gasoline prices together with the unwinding of the direct effects on year-over-year inflation of the introduction of the HST in the third quarter of 2010.
The January Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation in 2012 and 2013 was 2.0 per cent.
As reported in the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey, 92 per cent of firms expect average inflation over the next two years to remain within the 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range.
Core inflation is projected to moderate through 2012 to a level somewhat below 2 per cent, as excess supply persists and the effects of higher prices for food and clothing on year-over-year inflation unwind.
Total CPI inflation is projected to continue to decline to around 1.5 per cent by mid-2012, reflecting lower core inflation as well as the gradual impact on gasoline prices of the decline in world oil prices from their peak in the second quarter of 2011.
Both total and core inflation are expected to start to rise gradually by the end of 2012, reaching 2 per cent by the third quarter of 2013 as excess supply in the economy is slowly absorbed, the growth of labour compensation increases modestly and inflation expectations remain well anchored.
These inflation dynamics are similar to those anticipated in the October Report, although the overall inflation profile is marginally firmer in this projection, partly reflecting some expected persistence in the slightly higher-than-anticipated prices observed recently for motor vehicles and electricity.
These upside surprises have resulted in slightly higher-than-expected core inflation in recent months, the persistence of which is consistent with an economy estimated to be operating with somewhat less economic slack since mid-2011 than previously anticipated.
A slightly higher profile for oil prices than previously assumed is also incorporated, as is the estimated impact of the increase in the Quebec Sales Tax.
Chart 33 and Chart 34 depict the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the first quarter of 2012 to the end of 2013.
The inflation outlook in Canada is subject to significant risks.
Recently observed strength in US consumption could be more persistent than anticipated and fiscal policy could exert a smaller-than-anticipated drag on growth in the latter part of the projection.
Residential investment in Canada has been stronger than expected and household expenditures could have more momentum than currently projected.
The effects on Canada through financial, confidence and trade channels would be substantial, given the size and importance of the euro area to the global economy.
Europe is expected to emerge slowly from recession in the second half of 2012, although the risks around this outlook remain high.
The profile for US growth is slightly stronger, reflecting the balance of somewhat improved labour markets, financial conditions and confidence on the one hand, and emerging fiscal consolidation and ongoing household deleveraging on the other.
Economic activity in emerging-market economies is expected to moderate to a still-robust pace over the projection horizon, supported by an easing of macroeconomic policies.
Improved global economic prospects, supply disruptions and geopolitical risks have kept commodity prices elevated.
In particular, the international price of oil has risen further and is now considerably higher than that received by Canadian producers.
If sustained, these oil price developments could dampen the improvement in economic momentum.
The external headwinds facing Canada have abated somewhat, with the US recovery more resilient and financial conditions more supportive than previously anticipated.
As a result, business and household confidence are improving faster than forecast in January.
The Bank projects that private domestic demand will account for almost all of Canada's economic growth over the projection horizon.
Household spending is expected to remain high relative to GDP as households add to their debt burden, which remains the biggest domestic risk.
Business investment is projected to remain robust, reflecting solid balance sheets, very favourable credit conditions, continuing strong terms of trade and heightened competitive pressures.
The contribution of government spending to growth is expected to be quite modest over the projection horizon, in line with recent federal and provincial budgets.
The recovery in net exports is likely to remain weak in light of modest external demand and ongoing competitiveness challenges, including the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar.
The Bank projects that the economy will grow by 2.4 per cent in both 2012 and 2013 before moderating to 2.2 per cent in 2014.
The degree of economic slack has been somewhat smaller than the Bank had anticipated in January, and the economy is now expected to return to full capacity in the first half of 2013.
As a result of this reduced slack and higher gasoline prices, the profile for inflation is expected to be somewhat firmer than anticipated in January.
After moderating this quarter, total CPI inflation is expected, along with core inflation, to be around 2 per cent over the balance of the projection horizon as the economy reaches its production potential, the growth of labour compensation remains moderate and inflation expectations stay well anchored.
Despite recent improvements to the outlook for the global and Canadian economies, risks remain elevated.
The three main upside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the possibility of higher-than-expected oil prices, stronger-than-expected growth in the US economy and stronger momentum in Canadian household spending.
The two main downside risks to inflation in Canada relate to a reintensification of sovereign debt and banking concerns in Europe, and the possibility that growth in Canadian household spending could be weaker than projected.
Overall, the Bank judges that the risks to the inflation outlook in Canada are roughly balanced over the projection period.
Reflecting all of these factors, on 17 April, the Bank maintained the target for the overnight rate at 1 per cent.
In light of the reduced slack in the economy and firmer underlying inflation, some modest withdrawal of the present considerable monetary policy stimulus may become appropriate, consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target over the medium term.
The timing and degree of any such withdrawal will be weighed carefully against domestic and global economic developments.
Recent developments point to a somewhat stronger profile for global economic growth than was expected at the time of the last Report.
The heightened uncertainty around the global outlook has eased from very high levels, but volatility can be expected to persist.
Economic conditions in the United States have improved, and policy initiatives to address the sovereign debt and banking crisis in the euro area have resulted in some improvement in European debt markets and global financial conditions.
The global economy continues to face significant challenges, however.
Overall, global economic growth is projected to moderate in 2012 to 3.2 per cent and to recover to 3.4 per cent in 2013 and 3.8 per cent in 2014.
Despite the positive impact of recent policy initiatives, the euro area is still expected to experience a recession lasting until the third quarter of 2012, followed by a sluggish recovery, with fiscal austerity, bank deleveraging and weak confidence continuing to weigh on growth.
The US economic expansion is projected to continue at a moderate pace through 2014, owing to the restraining effects of household deleveraging, fiscal consolidation and continuing negative spillover effects from the European crisis.
Economic activity in emerging-market economies is expected to moderate over the projection horizon, albeit to a still-robust pace, supported by some easing in macroeconomic policies.
Improved prospects for global economic growth and supply-side disruptions have kept global commodity prices elevated, particularly for crude oil, where prices also incorporate a geopolitical risk premium related to tensions in the Middle East.
This is expected to have a slight dampening effect on global economic momentum.
In response to modest underlying inflation pressures, central banks in advanced economies have maintained policy rates at historically low levels, and a few have engaged in further quantitative easing.
Central banks in a number of emerging-market economies have continued to reverse past policy tightening in light of slowing prospects for domestic economic growth.
The measures taken in Europe to address the sovereign debt and bank funding crisis, as well as stronger growth prospects in the United States, have led to an improvement in market sentiment over this period.
The tone in markets was also boosted by the US stress tests, which showed that the largest US banks would retain sufficient capital to withstand an extremely adverse macroeconomic scenario.
More recently, however, concerns about the sovereign debt positions of some euro-area peripheral economies, especially Spain, have reintensified, and investor confidence has diminished somewhat.
European policy-makers have taken a number of initiatives over the past year to improve financial stability and confidence.
They have agreed on a second financial program for Greece in conjunction with substantial private sector debt relief, raised the requirement for core Tier 1 capital ratios for banks, adopted a new Fiscal Compact and increased the financial back-stop for euro-area members from 500 billion to 700 billion.
In addition, the European Central Bank has provided approximately 1 trillion in liquidity to banks in the region through two longer-term refinancing operations and loosened collateral requirements.
As a result, funding conditions for European financial institutions have improved.
With the exception of Spain, yields on euro-area government bonds have fallen, with sovereign spreads over German bonds declining.
Taken together, these developments suggest that the near-term risk of a severe bank liquidity crisis in the euro area has decreased.
Government bond yields in most major advanced economies have fluctuated noticeably since the release of the January Report.
Following an initial rise in reaction to improved prospects for global economic growth, yields have reversed most of their gains, owing to the deterioration in market sentiment in the past few weeks.
In particular, German bond yields have fallen to record lows.
Equity prices have fallen modestly in Europe since the last Report, reflecting renewed concerns over the debt situation, but have improved in most other economies.
Global corporate bond spreads have narrowed, particularly for financial and high-yield issuers, and yields on US investment-grade corporate bonds recently touched all-time lows.
In this shifting environment, corporate bond issuance has recovered strongly since the beginning of the year, with both financial and non-financial firms taking advantage of better access to primary markets.
Despite the generally improved tone in financial markets since January, banks in the euro area have continued to tighten borrowing conditions for households and firms.
Developments in Europe have also had an impact on bank lending conditions in the United States.
Foreign banks operating in the United States have tightened approval standards on loans to US corporations, while both US and foreign banks tightened conditions on loans to banks headquartered in Europe and to non-financial firms with significant exposures to European economies.
While the ECB's expanded liquidity operations have not by themselves directly improved the underlying health of bank balance sheets, they have created space for the restructuring of these balance sheets to proceed at an orderly pace.
Pressures on funding conditions from bank deleveraging in the euro area are thus expected to persist, but to be less intense than anticipated at the time of the January Report.
The euro area entered a recession in the fourth quarter of 2011, with real GDP contracting by 1.2 per cent, as expected.
However, recent economic conditions have improved slightly.
Business and consumer confidence have recovered modestly, and purchasing managers' indexes suggest that the pace of output contraction is likely to ease somewhat in the first half of 2012.
The divergences in economic conditions between the core and peripheral euro-area economies are striking.
The unemployment rate in Germany remains close to post-unification record lows, while unemployment rates in Spain, Portugal and Greece are at record highs.
Indicators such as unit labour costs suggest that the peripheral economies have made limited progress in narrowing their competitiveness gap with the core economies.
In light of continued economic weakness, some peripheral economies face considerable challenges in implementing the extensive fiscal adjustments and deep structural reforms required to restore competitiveness and ensure sustainable fiscal positions.
The euro area is projected to be in recession through the third quarter of 2012 as fiscal consolidation, bank deleveraging, tight financial conditions and negative confidence effects lead to a significant drop in domestic demand.
A modest recovery in economic activity is projected to begin in the second half of 2012, supported by a pickup in export growth in response to a gradual strengthening in external demand.
Domestic demand is projected to grow modestly beginning in 2013, boosted by a gradual easing in financial conditions and an improvement in confidence.
Relative to the January Report, the ongoing recession is expected to be somewhat shallower, owing to smaller-than-anticipated negative effects from both bank deleveraging and weak confidence levels.
Growth prospects over the remainder of the projection horizon, however, are similar to expectations in January.
Increases in commodity prices and a rise in indirect taxes and administered prices from fiscal consolidation brought total inflation in the euro area to 2.6 per cent in March.
Inflation pressures are expected to moderate over the projection horizon, however, in response to considerable excess capacity.
US real GDP grew by close to 2.5 per cent in the second half of 2011, from less than 1 per cent over the first half of the year, and recent economic developments have been largely positive.
On average, monthly employment gains have strengthened since the fourth quarter of 2011, and consumer and business confidence have shown more resilience than expected.
The assessment of the fundamentals for household spending is now stronger, owing to upward revisions to personal income over the second half of 2011, while the recent increase in equity prices has boosted household net worth.
The spillover effects of the euro-area crisis on US financial conditions and confidence are likely to be smaller than expected.
As a result, the profile for US economic growth is stronger over the projection horizon than was anticipated in the last Report, despite the negative effects of higher oil prices.
Notwithstanding this stronger outlook, US real GDP is projected to grow at a relatively modest pace through the first half of 2013, dampened by fiscal consolidation and continued household deleveraging.
Economic activity is expected to strengthen more noticeably thereafter as the impact of these factors dissipates.
On balance, growth in real GDP is projected to rise from 2.3 per cent in 2012, to 2.5 per cent in 2013 and 3.6 per cent in 2014.
Monetary conditions are expected to remain very accommodative: the US Federal Reserve recently extended, through to at least late 2014, its guidance regarding the period during which economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate.
In contrast, fiscal consolidation is expected to exert a significant drag on US economic growth, amounting to roughly 1 percentage point in 2012, 2.5 percentage points in 2013 and one-half percentage point in 2014, similar to expectations at the time of the January Report.
This projected fiscal drag includes the winding down of stimulus programs introduced during the recession, the expiration of payroll tax reductions at the end of 2012 and sequestration cuts starting in 2013.
The projected increase in US real GDP growth between 2013 and 2014 is highly contingent on the expected profile for fiscal policy.
The recovery in consumption spending is projected to remain quite modest by historical standards as households rebuild their balance sheets in an environment of persistently weak housing prices, fiscal consolidation, modest gains in employment and elevated oil prices.
Recent growth partly reflects an increase in the construction of apartment buildings, as high unemployment and tight mortgage credit conditions have led to a shift in demand away from home ownership toward renting.
The inventory of vacant houses and the pending supply of foreclosures remain near recent record-high levels and are restricting the construction of new homes, as well as putting downward pressure on house prices.
High vacancy rates and tight credit conditions have also been restraining the growth of non-residential construction.
Both residential and non-residential construction are projected to remain at low levels, although some gradual improvement is expected over the projection horizon, supported by the reduction in the overhang of unsold houses, a gradual easing in borrowing conditions and a stronger economy.
Exports and business investment in equipment and software are expected to provide important support to US economic growth over the projection horizon.
Notwithstanding the dampening effects from low rates of resource utilization, business investment is projected to grow at a healthy pace through 2014, supported by solid corporate balance sheets, strong earnings and the low cost of capital.
Although the growth of exports is expected to slow somewhat in 2012, owing to the recent appreciation of the US dollar and a deceleration in foreign demand, it should rebound over 2013-14 as global demand recovers.
Given the modest pace of US economic growth, excess supply conditions are expected to recede only gradually over the projection horizon.
As a result, underlying inflation pressures are projected to remain subdued.
In Japan, real GDP fell by 0.7 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2011 as supply-chain disruptions from the flooding in Thailand, as well as the high level of the yen and faltering external demand, caused a sharp decline in exports.
With rapid restoration of these supply chains, indicators suggest that growth in Japan resumed at a modestly positive pace in the first quarter of 2012.
Over the projection horizon, real GDP growth is projected to average around 1.7 per cent per year, supported by the continued rebuilding of infrastructure.
Although exports are expected to grow only modestly in 2012, they are projected to gather momentum beginning in 2013, as global demand rebounds.
With inflation well below the recently announced goal of 1 per cent, the Bank of Japan decided to increase the size of its Asset Purchase Program by 10 trillion, or about 2 per cent of GDP, through government bond purchases.
Real GDP growth in China in the first quarter moderated to 8.1 per cent on a year-over-year basis, as a result of lower external demand and the effects of previous tightening in monetary and macroprudential policies.
Activity in the housing sector has slowed, causing house prices to retreat from the recent peak reached in August 2011.
Consumer price inflation in China stood at 3.6 per cent in March 2012, well below its recent peak of 6.5 per cent in July 2011, owing in large part to rapidly moderating food price inflation.
With inflation pressures easing, monetary policy is becoming more accommodative.
Chinese authorities have reduced the reserve requirement ratio by 100 basis points since December, and further easing is expected.
Growth in China's real GDP is projected to average approximately 8 per cent per year through 2014, similar to expectations at the time of the January Report.
A modest appreciation of China's real exchange rate and the government's announced plan to boost household spending are expected to support a gradual rotation of demand away from exports and investment and toward consumption.
Nevertheless, global imbalances remain a concern and are projected to stay elevated over the projection horizon.
Real GDP growth in other emerging-market economies is also projected to decelerate in 2012, driven primarily by slowing external demand, past policy tightening and pressures on financial conditions from international bank deleveraging in some countries.
Global commodity prices have generally stayed at elevated levels, but have moved in somewhat different directions over the past few months.
Heightened geopolitical tensions in the Middle East, together with supply disruptions in some jurisdictions and an improvement in the outlook for global economic activity, have combined to push Brent crude oil prices above the levels anticipated at the time of the January Report.
Prices for West Texas Intermediate crude oil, in contrast, are little changed compared with their levels at the time of the January Report, owing to abundant supply conditions in the US Midwest.
As a result, the spread between Brent and WTI crude oil prices has widened to approximately US$20 per barrel.
Based on the latest futures curve, prices for both Brent and WTI are projected to remain firm in the near term, declining thereafter in response to the normalization of global supply conditions.
Oil prices are projected to be higher than expected at the time of the last Report, consistent with a more optimistic assessment of demand prospects.
North American prices for natural gas have fallen, as cuts in production have failed to offset the impact of unseasonably warm weather.
The latest futures curve suggests that natural gas prices will rise through 2014 as natural gas gains market share as an input for the generation of electricity, but prices are nevertheless projected to remain at relatively low levels, below the profile anticipated in the January Report.
Prices of non-energy commodities have increased over the past few months, supported by improved global demand, as well as supply concerns in agricultural markets.
While prices for agricultural products are expected to decline over the projection horizon as supply conditions improve, prices for forestry products are projected to rise gradually, in line with a modest recovery in the US housing sector.
Metals prices are expected to remain at current levels until the end of 2013, before rising in 2014 owing to stronger global economic growth.
The foreign activity measure has recovered only half of the decline experienced during the last recession, owing largely to protracted weakness in the US housing sector.
This measure is expected to steadily expand over the projection horizon, as the composition of external demand becomes more favourable to Canadian exports, surpassing its pre-recession level in the second half of 2013.
The projected profile of the activity measure is somewhat stronger than was anticipated in the January Report, in line with the upward revision to the US economic outlook.
Higher global commodity prices typically have positive wealth and income effects on the Canadian economy through improved terms of trade.
However, the Bank of Canada's commodity price index has declined since January, owing largely to the relatively high weight of natural gas prices in the index.
Moreover, although global oil prices have risen sharply since January, the prices received by Canadian producers of crude oil have declined.
Going forward, the BCPI and the terms of trade are projected to rise through 2014, reflecting some recovery in natural gas prices, continued increases in non-energy commodity prices, and an expected narrowing in the spread between Canadian export and import prices for crude oil.
The Bank expects the Canadian economy to grow at a moderate pace over the projection horizon, with total and core CPI inflation remaining close to the 2 per cent target.
The Bank continues to anticipate that the economic expansion will be driven by growth in private domestic demand over the projection horizon.
Net exports are expected to contribute only marginally to overall growth, reflecting the modest recovery in foreign activity and Canada's ongoing competitiveness challenges, including the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar.
Economic momentum in Canada is slightly firmer than the Bank had expected in the January Report.
The external headwinds facing the Canadian economy have abated somewhat, with the US economic recovery showing more resilience than previously anticipated and financial conditions more supportive than expected.
Furthermore, with confidence having rebounded more quickly than envisaged in January, the Bank expects that global uncertainty will have less of a dampening effect on the spending of Canadian households and businesses in coming quarters.
Credit conditions for Canadian firms began to ease again in the first quarter, as reported in both the Bank's Senior Loan Officer Survey and the Business Outlook Survey , in the context of improved global financial conditions.
Financial markets in Canada have maintained a positive tone in recent months in the face of fluctuations in Europe.
Yields on Canadian government bonds are just above the low levels seen at the time of the January Report, having moved generally in line with major foreign markets.
Corporate yields have also remained at very low levels, and the volume of bond issuance has increased.
These favourable developments are partly due to sustained international demand for the debt of Canadian governments, banks and corporations, a sign that their credit quality is perceived to be high by global standards.
While the S&P/TSX Composite Index has declined slightly since the January Report, the prices of Canadian bank equities, which had performed better than those of other advanced economies during a period of heightened uncertainty last year, have risen further.
In this context, Canadian banks continue to be well positioned to lend, with ready access to relatively low-cost funding across the term structure in both Canadian and foreign currencies.
The growth of business credit has picked up somewhat in recent months, consistent with some easing in credit conditions and a pickup in the growth of business investment.
However, given their strong aggregate financial position, non-financial corporations continue to have a limited need for external financing.
Household credit also remains readily available at near-record low rates, owing in large part to exceptionally low long-term fixed mortgage rates.
The pace of household credit growth has moderated in recent months, however, following a long period of comparatively rapid growth that has pushed household indebtedness to record levels relative to disposable income.
As confidence in Canada has improved in recent months, growth in the narrow monetary aggregates has moderated, consistent with a reduced preference for liquidity.
Growth in the broad monetary aggregates has also eased modestly of late, while remaining consistent with expectations of relatively subdued inflation pressures.
The slack in the Canadian economy is now estimated to be less than previously expected, since the level of real GDP in the first quarter of 2012 is estimated to be 0.3 per cent higher than the Bank had forecast in the January Report.
This reflects the combination of an upward revision to reported GDP growth in the third quarter of 2011, an upwardly revised estimate of 2.5 per cent growth for the first quarter of 2012, and fourth-quarter growth of 1.8 per cent, which was broadly in line with expectations in the January Report.
On balance, these results reflect greater momentum in household consumption and business investment in Canada, as well as stronger-than-anticipated foreign activity.
The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap, at -0.4 per cent in the first quarter of 2012, also points to less slack in the economy than previously expected.
This is consistent with responses to the Bank's Business Outlook Survey in recent quarters, which have shown that the proportion of firms that would have difficulty responding to an unexpected increase in demand has remained close to its historical average.
Developments in labour market indicators have been consistent with the persistence of a slightly greater degree of excess supply.
Despite notable improvements in March, both employment and the unemployment rate are little changed, overall, from their levels six months ago.
Similarly, the proportion of involuntary part-time workers has only partially recovered from its sharp rise during the recession, pointing to the persistence of unused capacity in the labour market.
The proportion of firms reporting labour shortages in the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey also remained below its historical average.
On balance, the Bank judges that the economy was operating at roughly half a per cent below its production capacity in the first quarter of 2012, a smaller degree of slack than had been anticipated in the January Report.
The Bank expects a moderate pace of expansion to continue over the projection horizon.
On an average annual basis, real GDP is forecast to grow by 2.4 per cent in both 2012 and 2013, before moderating to 2.2 per cent, the rate of the economy's production potential, in 2014.
This outlook for the Canadian economy is slightly firmer than in the January Report, with greater momentum through 2012 than had been anticipated, although the projected pace of growth in 2013 is now somewhat more modest than previously envisaged.
The stronger quarterly profile over most of 2012 partly reflects more positive sentiment than previously assumed, in line with the stronger US and global economic outlook.
The profile for growth in consumption and investment is more front-loaded than previously expected, in part reflecting a more rapid improvement in confidence.
The rise in global oil prices since the January Report is not, however, expected to provide a further boost to domestic demand through higher real incomes, since the prices received by Canadian producers have gone down, while those paid by Canadian consumers have gone up.
Nonetheless, the recent greater momentum in private domestic demand is forecast to result in a higher profile for imports than in January, offsetting the more positive contribution to economic growth of stronger foreign activity and stronger Canadian exports in this projection.
Growth in household expenditures (the combination of consumer spending and residential investment) has picked up in recent quarters, and is expected to continue at a moderate pace through 2014.
The Bank continues to expect consumption to grow at a rate that is slightly below the projected moderate growth in personal disposable income, resulting in a slight rise in the savings rate.
Growth in residential investment, which is currently supported by very favourable mortgage-financing conditions, is forecast to slow over the projection horizon.
Nonetheless, the ratio of household expenditures to GDP is expected to remain relatively high over the projection horizon.
In that context, the ratio of household debt to income is projected to rise further.
The Bank continues to expect robust growth in business fixed investment over the projection horizon, reflecting the strong financial positions of Canadian firms, favourable credit conditions, high commodity prices and the strong Canadian dollar, as well as the impetus to improve productivity amid heightened pressures to become more competitive.
This robust outlook for growth in investment broadly maintains the share of investment in GDP around its historical average.
The projected profile for business fixed investment has been revised up from the January Report, particularly for 2012, reflecting a stronger and less uncertain global economic outlook.
This forecast is consistent with Statistics Canada's survey on private and public investment intentions, which points to strong growth in 2012 led by the oil and gas sector, and with the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey, which indicates that investment intentions over the next 12 months remain strongly positive.
The contribution of government spending to real GDP growth is expected to be quite modest over the projection horizon, in line with the fiscal plans of federal and provincial governments to consolidate spending, as outlined in recent budget statements.
In this regard, significant downward revisions to National Accounts estimates of government spending in recent quarters suggest that the unwinding of the temporary fiscal stimulus measures implemented during the recession was largely completed by the end of 2011.
In light of these developments, the Bank assumes a somewhat lower overall profile for government expenditures over the projection horizon than in the January Report.
The recovery in net exports is expected to remain weak.
With low levels of US demand for autos and housing, coupled with ongoing competitiveness challenges, Canada's exports are not forecast to regain their pre-recession peak until the end of 2013.
In contrast, the level of imports has already regained its pre-recession peak.
Partly as a result, Canada's current account balance has declined from a pre-recession surplus to a deficit of approximately 2 per cent of GDP, which is projected to persist over the forecast horizon.
With a somewhat stronger external environment and slightly more momentum in domestic demand, both exports and imports are expected to rise at a somewhat faster pace than anticipated in the January Report, although the Bank continues to expect that net exports will contribute little to Canada's GDP growth over the projection horizon.
Overall, real GDP in Canada is projected to grow at a slightly faster pace than the estimated growth rate of potential output in coming quarters.
As a result, the economy is anticipated to gradually return to full capacity by the first half of 2013, earlier than expected in the January Report.
In this context, the Canadian economy is forecast to operate with somewhat less slack throughout the projection horizon than indicated in the January base-case scenario, largely reflecting the slightly higher level of economic activity seen recently.
Core CPI inflation averaged 2.2 per cent over January and February, up slightly from 2.1 per cent in the fourth quarter.
As anticipated, the gradual increase from 1.5 per cent in the first half of 2011 partly reflected the lagged effects of higher world prices for agricultural products on the prices of food and clothing, as well as the dissipation of the effect of the introduction of the harmonized sales tax in Ontario and British Columbia in the third quarter of 2010 on year-over-year core inflation.
This upward movement in core inflation has also been reflected in alternative measures of underlying inflation.
Despite higher core inflation, total CPI inflation has declined from its peak of 3.4 per cent in the second quarter of 2011 to an average of 2.6 per cent in January and February.
This drop reflects some moderation in gasoline prices from levels seen a year ago, as well as the unwinding of the direct effects of the HST on year-over-year inflation.
However, with the rebound in gasoline prices in recent months, total CPI inflation has remained higher than expected in the January Report.
The April Consensus Economics forecasts for total CPI inflation in 2012 and 2013 were 2.1 per cent and 2.0 per cent, respectively.
As reported in the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey, over 90 per cent of firms expect average inflation over the next two years to remain within the 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range.
Market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations also continue to be consistent with the 2 per cent inflation-control target.
Core inflation is projected to stay close to 2 per cent over the projection horizon, as the economy remains near its production potential, the growth of labour compensation remains moderate and inflation expectations stay well anchored.
The Bank forecasts a slight decline in core inflation in the near term, reflecting the unwinding of the effects of higher prices for food and clothing on year-over-year inflation, as well as lower electricity prices.
Core inflation is expected to converge to 2 per cent thereafter as excess supply is fully absorbed.
As well, the indirect effects associated with the announced restoration of the provincial sales tax in British Columbia are expected to provide a modest temporary lift to core inflation, beginning in the second quarter of 2013.
Underlying inflation is somewhat firmer than in the January Report, owing largely to reduced economic slack.
Total CPI inflation is also projected to decline in the near term to close to 2 per cent, in part reflecting lower core inflation, and to remain around the target over the balance of the projection horizon.
The Bank no longer expects total CPI inflation to move significantly below 2 per cent later in 2012.
This reflects slightly firmer underlying inflation and, more importantly, the fact that the higher prices for gasoline observed recently (primarily because of higher prices for Brent crude oil, Box 1) are expected to be more persistent.
Significant steps have been taken to address the sovereign debt and banking crisis in the euro area, reducing the chances of an extreme negative event, but risks in this regard still rest clearly on the downside.
Global inflationary pressures could be more persistent than currently projected if oil prices continue to rise and remain above the levels implied by current futures prices.
Private sector demand in the United States could be stronger than anticipated, and fiscal policy could exert a smaller-than-anticipated drag on growth, if US authorities smooth the path of fiscal consolidation following the November elections.
Although policy initiatives to address the sovereign debt and banking crisis in the euro area have resulted in some improvement in European debt markets and global financial conditions, this risk could re-escalate, affecting Canada through financial, confidence and trade channels.
Continuing high household debt levels in Canada could lead to a sharper-than-expected deceleration in household spending.
While the economic expansion in the United States continues at a gradual but somewhat slower pace, developments in Europe point to a renewed contraction.
In China and other emerging economies, the deceleration in growth has been greater than anticipated, reflecting past policy tightening and weaker external demand.
This slowdown in global activity has led to a sizable reduction in commodity prices, although they remain elevated.
The combination of increasing global excess capacity over the projection horizon and reduced commodity prices is expected to moderate global inflationary pressures.
Global financial conditions have also deteriorated since April, with periods of considerable volatility.
The Bank's base-case projection assumes that the European crisis will continue to be contained, although this assumption is subject to downside risks.
While global headwinds are restraining Canadian economic activity, domestic factors are expected to support moderate growth in Canada.
The Bank expects the economy to grow at a pace roughly in line with its production potential in the near term, before picking up through 2013.
Consumption and business investment are expected to be the primary drivers of growth, reflecting very stimulative domestic financial conditions.
However, their pace will be influenced by external headwinds, notably the effects of lower commodity prices on Canadian incomes and wealth, as well as by record-high household debt.
Housing activity is expected to slow from record levels.
Government spending is not projected to contribute to growth in 2012 and to contribute only modestly thereafter, in line with plans to consolidate spending by federal and provincial governments.
Canadian exports are projected to remain below their pre-recession peak until the beginning of 2014, reflecting the dynamics of foreign demand and ongoing competitiveness challenges, including the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar.
The Bank projects that the economy will grow by 2.1 per cent in 2012, 2.3 per cent in 2013 and 2.5 per cent in 2014.
The economy is expected to reach full capacity in the second half of 2013, thus operating with a small amount of slack for somewhat longer than previously anticipated.
Core inflation is forecast to remain around 2 per cent over the projection horizon as the economy operates near its production potential, growth in labour compensation stays moderate and inflation expectations remain well anchored.
Given the recent drop in gasoline prices and with futures prices suggesting persistently lower oil prices, the Bank expects total CPI inflation to remain noticeably below the 2 per cent target over the coming year before returning to target around mid-2013.
The three main upside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the possibility of higher global inflationary pressures, stronger Canadian exports and stronger momentum in Canadian household spending.
The three main downside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the European crisis, weaker global momentum and the possibility that growth in Canadian household spending could be weaker.
Reflecting all of these factors, on 17 July, the Bank decided to maintain the target for the overnight rate at 1 per cent.
To the extent that the economic expansion continues and the current excess supply in the economy is gradually absorbed, some modest withdrawal of the present considerable monetary policy stimulus may become appropriate, consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target over the medium term.
While the economic expansion in the United States continues at a gradual but somewhat slower pace, developments in the euro area point to a renewed contraction.
In China and other emerging-market countries, the deceleration in economic growth has been greater than previously anticipated.
This slowdown in global economic activity has led to a sizable reduction in commodity prices, although they remain elevated.
Global financial conditions have deteriorated since the last Report, with periods of considerable volatility.
Global economic growth is expected to moderate from 3.8 per cent in 2011 to 3.1 per cent in 2012 and 2013, before rising to 3.5 per cent in 2014.
Given this relatively modest growth profile, global excess capacity is expected to increase over the projection horizon.
The Bank's base-case scenario assumes that the crisis in the euro area will continue to be contained, although this assumption is subject to downside risks.
The projection also assumes that current legislation in the United States, which implies a severe tightening of fiscal policy at the beginning of 2013 (the so-called "fiscal cliff"), will be modified to spread the fiscal contraction over several years.
Underlying inflation pressures in advanced economies are expected to ease over the projection horizon in response to the considerable excess capacity.
As a result, central banks in some advanced economies have provided additional monetary stimulus, either by lowering policy interest rates or by undertaking further unconventional measures.
In emerging-market economies , some of the past monetary tightening is being reversed and new fiscal stimulus has been announced.
Global financial conditions have deteriorated since the last Report.
Renewed worries about the sustainability of sovereign debt and the health of the banking sectors in some euro-area economies, as well as downward revisions to the prospects for global economic growth, have led to a significant deterioration in market sentiment.
Spreads on some euro-area sovereign bonds have risen markedly over the period, with Spanish spreads relative to German bonds reaching euro-era record highs.
At the same time, growing investor appetite for safer and more-liquid assets has pushed government bond yields in most major advanced economies to record lows and exerted strong upward pressure on currencies such as the US dollar and the Japanese yen.
The value of the euro, in contrast, has weakened noticeably and a large number of emerging-market currencies have also fallen, in response to an abrupt reversal of capital flows.
Other asset classes have also been affected by changes in market sentiment.
Equity prices have softened in the past few months, especially bank equities.
However, corporate bond issuance outside of Europe has held up relatively well and spreads are little changed from their levels at the time of the last Report.
Bank funding conditions have tightened in recent months, although the extent has varied across countries.
Banks in a number of economies, such as the United States and the United Kingdom, have experienced a relatively modest rise in funding costs, while banks in the euro area are facing increased pressures.
Banks in the United Kingdom have tightened lending terms on some loans to households and corporations.
Although US banks have implemented a modest easing of lending standards more broadly in recent months, they have tightened standards on loans to European banks and to non-financial firms that have substantial exposure to Europe.
Real GDP in the euro area contracted by 1.3 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2011 and was basically unchanged in the first quarter of 2012.
While GDP growth was stronger in the first quarter than anticipated in the April Report, this positive surprise is unlikely to persist, as economic conditions continue to deteriorate in many euro-area countries.
With nearly half of all euro-area economies already in recession, real GDP and private domestic demand are below their pre-crisis peaks by about 2 per cent and 6 per cent, respectively.
The adverse feedback loop between weakening economic activity and sovereign and banking sector vulnerabilities has intensified, rendering the task of fiscal consolidation even more challenging.
Moreover, the worsening economic situation in the peripheral economies has begun to spread to the previously resilient core countries.
Sentiment has deteriorated and, in June, purchasing managers' indexes were generally at a level consistent with a contraction in economic activity, even in the core economies.
Euro-area GDP is projected to contract in the final three quarters of 2012.
A very modest recovery is expected to begin in 2013, driven largely by a strengthening in exports supported by the low level of the euro and a gradual pickup in external demand.
Domestic demand is forecast to act as a drag on growth in 2013 and to expand only modestly in 2014, in response to a slight improvement in confidence and some easing in financial conditions.
Despite subdued economic conditions, headline inflation in the euro area, at 2.4 per cent in June, has remained relatively elevated, partly reflecting increases in indirect taxes and administered prices.
Underlying inflation pressures are expected to moderate over the projection horizon, owing to the impact of growing unused capacity and projected declines in commodity prices, although measured inflation will be held up somewhat by the effects of additional increases in indirect taxes and administered prices.
European policy-makers announced a number of new initiatives on 29 June designed to reinforce the monetary union and ease borrowing conditions for sovereigns.
Timely implementation of these significant measures, together with other substantive reforms, will likely be needed to continue to contain the crisis.
The US economic expansion is continuing at a modest pace, with real GDP growing by 1.9 per cent in the first quarter of 2012, slightly weaker than expected at the time of the April Report.
The profile for US economic growth has been revised downward over the projection horizon, reflecting a more gradual improvement in labour market conditions, weaker external demand and the recent rise in the US dollar.
These influences are expected to more than offset the positive impact from the easing in US monetary policy and lower oil prices.
US real GDP is forecast to grow by slightly less than 2 per cent, on average, through the first half of 2013, in response to the restraining effects from fiscal consolidation, household deleveraging, modest growth in external demand and tight financial conditions.
Fiscal consolidation is expected to have a significant dampening effect on US economic growth over the projection horizon.
In view of the considerable uncertainty regarding the pace of fiscal consolidation, the Bank's base-case scenario assumes that the fiscal drag will amount to roughly 1 percentage point in 2012 and 1.5 percentage points in 2013 and 2014.
However, a severe tightening of fiscal policy at the beginning of 2013 (the fiscal cliff) is built into current legislation, which could reduce US real GDP growth next year by up to 4 percentage points if it is not amended.
In contrast, monetary policy is expected to remain highly accommodative throughout the projection horizon.
The US Federal Reserve has recently lengthened the duration of its program to extend the average maturity of its holdings of securities from June 2012 to the end of the year and continues to expect that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate, at least through late 2014.
Growth in consumption is expected to remain modest over the projection horizon as households continue to rebuild their balance sheets in an environment of subdued labour market conditions, fiscal restraint and persistently weak house prices.
The boost to real purchasing power from lower oil prices should provide some support to household spending, however.
The US housing market continues to be weak relative to previous recoveries.
The demand for housing remains subdued in light of the tight underwriting standards for new mortgage origination, while the large overhang of unoccupied dwellings and homes in the foreclosure pipeline continues to restrain increases in both home-building and prices.
Housing starts have picked up to above 700,000 units from a recessionary trough near 500,000 units, but remain well below the 1.7 million-unit average in the decade leading up to the crisis.
Residential construction is expected to pick up further from these still-low levels, supported by an improvement in labour market conditions, a gradual easing in lending conditions and a reduction in the stock of vacant homes.
Elevated vacancy rates and tight borrowing conditions are also restraining growth in non-residential construction.
A modest recovery is projected to unfold in this sector beginning in 2013, as the effects from these factors gradually dissipate.
As the situation in Europe improves and the uncertainty regarding US fiscal policy is resolved, business investment is projected to gain momentum, supported by strong corporate balance sheets and profits.
Although growth in US exports is expected to decelerate during 2012, owing to the impact of slowing demand from trading partners and the past appreciation of the US real effective exchange rate, it is projected to strengthen starting in 2013 when global demand begins to recover.
In light of the subdued pace of the US economic expansion, the amount of excess supply in the economy is expected to remain significant through 2014 and is projected to dampen underlying inflation pressures.
Real GDP in Japan rose by 4.7 per cent in the first quarter of the year, significantly above expectations at the time of the April Report.
The rebound in GDP growth reflects a marked increase in consumption supported by subsidies for the purchase of fuel-efficient motor vehicles, and a robust rise in public spending related to reconstruction.
With inflation remaining well below the official goal of 1 per cent, the Bank of Japan decided to expand the size of its Asset Purchase Program, postpone the targeted expiry date of the program by six months and purchase longer-dated government bonds.
Japan's real GDP is expected to grow at a moderate pace through 2013, supported by reconstruction activity and government stimulus programs.
Growth in economic activity is projected to slow in 2014, however, owing to the drag from a planned increase in the value-added tax.
Growth in exports is projected to be restrained through 2014 by the elevated level of the yen and modest growth in foreign demand.
Relative to the April Report, real GDP growth is expected to be stronger in 2012, but somewhat weaker thereafter.
Economic growth in China is slowing to a greater degree than anticipated at the time of the April Report.
Real GDP growth moderated to 7.6 per cent on a year-over-year basis in the second quarter of 2012, the weakest result in more than three years.
The past tightening in monetary and macroprudential policies has led to a broad deceleration in domestic demand, while weaker external demand, especially from Europe, has weighed on export growth.
Inflation pressures are easing, with consumer price inflation falling to 2.2 per cent in June, owing mainly to a moderation in food prices.
Housing prices have also continued to soften on a year-over-year basis.
In light of slowing economic growth and moderating price pressures, the People's Bank of China has continued to ease monetary policy, lowering the reserve requirement ratio for financial institutions by a total of 150 basis points since December and cutting its benchmark lending interest rate by a total of 56 basis points in the past two months.
The fiscal stance has also been relaxed.
Real GDP in China is projected to average 7.8 per cent per year through 2014.
Growth in exports is expected to be restrained over 2012 by weak activity in advanced economies, especially in the euro area, but is projected to pick up in late 2013 and 2014, as the external environment improves.
A slow rotation of demand away from exports and toward consumption is forecast over the projection horizon, facilitated by the government's announced plan to boost household spending and by a very modest appreciation of the real effective exchange rate.
As a result, some limited progress in resolving global imbalances is expected over the projection horizon.
In other emerging-market economies, moderating external demand, past tightening in monetary policy, pressures on financial conditions from foreign bank deleveraging and, in some cases, stalled reform efforts, have led to a progressive deceleration in economic activity.
In Brazil, economic growth was close to zero in the first quarter of 2012, while growth in India was the weakest it has been in a decade.
In response to reduced prospects for growth, central banks in many emerging-market economies are reversing previous policy tightening and lowering policy interest rates.
New fiscal stimulus measures are also being implemented in a number of countries.
Economic growth is nevertheless projected to remain relatively subdued through the first half of 2013 and then to gradually pick up as the demand for exports strengthens in advanced economies.
Relative to the April Report, real GDP growth is expected to be weaker over the projection horizon, owing to lower external demand.
Although elevated by historical standards, the prices of many commodities have declined since the April Report, in response to weakening world economic prospects.
Global oil prices have registered the largest drop, falling by about 15 per cent since April.
The latest futures curve suggests that Brent crude prices will decline gradually over the projection horizon, reflecting softer demand conditions combined with expectations of robust production from countries that are not part of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries.
The spread between West Texas Intermediate and Brent prices is projected to narrow from about US$16 in the second quarter of 2012 to around US$7 by the end of 2014, as additions to the pipeline network are expected to contribute to a partial resolution of oversupply conditions in the US Midwest.
Although natural gas prices have rebounded since the April Report, boosted by growing demand for electricity generation, they are still very low by historical standards.
Based on the latest futures curve, natural gas prices are expected to continue to rise through 2014, similar to expectations in April.
Prices for most non-energy commodities have declined slightly since April and are generally projected to stay marginally below the levels anticipated at the time of the last Report through 2014.
Slowing growth in demand from China and the situation in the euro area have put significant downward pressure on the prices of base metals, which is expected to continue until early 2013.
Prices for base metals are then projected to increase slowly, supported by the pickup in global economic growth.
As recent severe weather conditions have reduced supply, prices for agricultural products are expected to remain elevated for the remainder of 2012 and to decline thereafter.
Owing to the gradual pace of the recovery in the US housing sector and a moderation in demand from China, prices for forestry products are expected to remain weak over the projection horizon.
Demand for Canada's exports remains modest: the foreign activity measure has recovered only slightly more than half of the decline recorded during the 2008-09 recession, largely owing to the weak US recovery.
The foreign activity measure is expected to grow steadily over the projection horizon and to outpace the growth in trade-weighted foreign GDP as well as US GDP, reflecting sustained momentum in US business investment spending and a gradual recovery in the US housing market from depressed levels.
The measure is projected to surpass its pre-recession level during the second half of 2013.
Relative to the April Report, the expected profile of the foreign activity measure is nonetheless lower through 2014, with the downward revision to the outlook for global economic growth partly offset by the slightly more favourable composition of US demand.
These modifications highlight the growing share of crude oil output and the shift away from natural gas in the total value of Canadian commodity production.
Based on the new methodology, the BCPI has declined by approximately 6 per cent since April.
Prices for Western Canada Select have fallen by 22 per cent since the April Report, a larger decline than in global prices, as strong growth in production and temporary refinery and pipeline outages have led to excess supply.
These developments have caused a deterioration in Canada's terms of trade.
Over the projection horizon, the BCPI is expected to increase, reflecting a sustained rise in natural gas prices and a slight narrowing of the gap between the price for Brent crude and North American crude oil benchmarks.
The Canadian dollar has averaged 98 cents US since the June fixed announcement date and is assumed to remain at this level over the projection horizon, compared with the 101 cents US assumed in the April Report.
The Bank expects the Canadian economy to grow at a pace roughly in line with its production potential in the near term, before picking up through 2013.
The Bank continues to anticipate that, over the projection horizon, the expansion will be driven mainly by growth in consumption and business investment, reflecting very stimulative domestic financial conditions.
The projected growth in household expenditures and business investment has been revised somewhat lower, largely owing to the reintensification of external headwinds, notably the effects of lower commodity prices on Canadian incomes and wealth.
The projected growth in exports is also weaker than in the April Report, in line with the more subdued outlook for foreign demand.
As a result, the Canadian economy is expected to continue to operate with a small amount of slack for somewhat longer than previously anticipated.
The Bank continues to forecast that core inflation will remain around 2 per cent over the projection horizon as the economy operates near its production potential, the growth of labour compensation stays moderate and inflation expectations remain well anchored.
Reflecting lower prices for gasoline, total CPI inflation is expected to remain noticeably below the 2 per cent target over the coming year, before returning to target around mid-2013.
Despite the deterioration in global financial conditions, the supply and price of credit for businesses and households in Canada remain very stimulative, providing important ongoing support to the economic expansion.
Canadian financial markets have remained resilient in recent months, although they have been affected by heightened risk aversion and volatility in global markets.
Most notably, the S&P/TSX Composite Index has declined by roughly 10 per cent from its first-quarter peak and volatility has increased.
Credit spreads on Canadian corporate bonds have also widened somewhat, although all-in yields have fallen as yields on Canadian government bonds have declined to record lows, and the volume of bond issuance has remained robust.
Canadian banks continue to be well positioned to lend, with ready access to relatively low-cost funding across the term structure in both Canadian and foreign currencies.
The Bank's latest Senior Loan Officer Survey and the balance of opinion of Canadian firms surveyed in the Bank's summer Business Outlook Survey together suggested little change in business lending conditions in recent months, following several quarters of persistent easing.
In the context of these broadly favourable financing conditions for Canadian firms, the growth of overall business credit has picked up to a rate above its historical average.
Growth in short-term business credit has been particularly strong, while growth in long-term business credit has remained moderate.
These developments are consistent with the ongoing solid growth in business investment and the ample availability of internal funds owing to the strong balance-sheet positions of non-financial firms.
Although household credit also continues to be readily available at near-record low rates, the pace of growth in household credit has slowed somewhat since the latter part of 2011.
Nonetheless, this follows an extended period of rapid growth in household credit, and the particularly strong activity in the housing market seen early in 2012 suggests some re-acceleration in mortgage credit in the near term.
Compared with the unusually rapid pace observed in late 2011, growth in the narrow monetary aggregates has moderated in recent months, consistent with reduced liquidity preference.
Growth in the broad monetary aggregates has been moderate over the same period, suggesting relatively subdued inflation pressures ahead.
The Canadian economy continues to operate with a small amount of spare capacity.
Real GDP grew by 1.9 per cent in the first quarter of 2012 and is estimated to have grown at a similar pace in the second quarter, both broadly in line with the estimated growth of the economy's production potential, thus maintaining the small degree of economic slack that existed at the end of 2011.
As a result, economic slack was not absorbed through the first half of 2012 as previously projected, with the level of real GDP in the second quarter 0.4 per cent below the level anticipated in the April Report.
These dynamics are reflected in the evolution of the Bank's conventional measure of the output gap, which has been broadly stable in recent quarters at around -0.5 per cent.
Taken together, other indicators of pressures on capacity also point to the persistence of a small degree of slack in the Canadian economy.
Responses to the Bank's Business Outlook Survey in recent quarters have shown that the proportion of firms that would have difficulty responding to an unexpected increase in demand has stayed close to its historical average, while the proportion of firms reporting labour shortages in the Bank's summer Business Outlook Survey has remained somewhat below its historical average.
Despite notable increases in employment in March and April, the unemployment rate has remained close to the levels prevailing around mid-2011, and the proportion of involuntary part-time workers continues to be elevated.
On balance, the Bank judges that the economy was operating at roughly half of a per cent below its production capacity in the second quarter of 2012.
This is the same degree of slack as estimated in the first quarter, and is slightly greater than had been anticipated in the April Report for the second quarter.
The Bank expects the Canadian economy to grow at a pace roughly in line with its production potential in coming quarters, before picking up thereafter.
On an average annual basis, real GDP growth is forecast to increase slightly from 2.1 per cent in 2012 to 2.3 per cent in 2013 and 2.5 per cent in 2014.
The Bank continues to anticipate that consumption and business fixed investment will be the primary drivers of growth in real GDP over the projection horizon, supported by accommodative domestic financial conditions.
Following surprising recent strength, housing investment is expected to slow, contributing to a more balanced composition of economic growth than has been seen in recent quarters.
Overall, the outlook for domestic demand is weaker than in the April Report, although the revisions are relatively small, since Canadian business sentiment and household confidence have held up relatively well despite rising global uncertainty.
The Bank continues to expect little contribution to economic growth from net exports over the forecast horizon, with roughly offsetting downward revisions to exports and imports in this projection.
While growth in household spending has been moderate in recent quarters, it has been disproportionately supported by housing investment, which is around historical highs and showing signs of overbuilding.
The growth of consumption has slowed, together with the growth of disposable income, but housing investment has strengthened further, with both the construction of new multiple-family dwellings and renovation activity expanding robustly.
In this context, the household debt-to-income ratio has continued to rise, reaching a record high in the first quarter of 2012.
The Bank anticipates that growth in household expenditures will rely less on housing investment over the projection horizon.
Growth in consumption is expected to rebound slightly from its modest pace through the first half of 2012, growing at a rate just below that of disposable income through 2014, resulting in a slight increase in the personal savings rate.
In contrast, housing investment is projected to slow, with its share of the overall economy moderating somewhat from the current unusually elevated level.
In this regard, the additional prudent and timely measures recently announced by federal authorities are expected to contribute to a more sustainable evolution of housing market activity in Canada.
The outlook for growth in household expenditures is slightly weaker in this projection than in the April Report, owing in part to the impact of the more subdued global economic and financial environment on Canadian incomes and wealth.
Despite the lower forecast for household spending, however, the Bank continues to expect further increases in the household debt-to-income ratio in coming quarters.
This reflects the strong financial positions of Canadian firms, favourable credit conditions and the strong Canadian dollar, as well as the impetus to improve productivity amid heightened pressures to become more competitive.
This forecast is consistent with the positive responses to the Bank's summer Business Outlook Survey.
Nonetheless, with the level of commodity prices expected to stay elevated, the outlook for major investments in the resource sector remains strong.
Government spending is projected to subtract from real GDP growth in 2012.
This drag on economic growth is larger than in the April Report, as significant further downward revisions to national accounts estimates of government expenditures in recent quarters suggest a more rapid unwinding of the fiscal stimulus measures enacted during the recession than previously estimated.
Modest contributions to growth are expected in 2013 and 2014, although these contributions are projected to be considerably weaker than has been typical historically, in line with the plans of federal and provincial governments to consolidate spending.
Growth in Canada's exports is projected to remain moderate despite steady growth in foreign activity, owing to ongoing competitiveness challenges, including the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar.
As a result, the level of Canada's exports is not forecast to regain its pre-recession peak until the beginning of 2014.
Growth in imports is expected to be more moderate than previously anticipated, largely as a result of the weaker near-term outlook for consumption and business investment in Canada.
Overall, as in the April Report, the projected contribution from net exports to real GDP growth is marginal.
Given the above projection for real GDP, the Canadian economy is expected to reach full capacity in the second half of 2013, thus operating with a small amount of slack for somewhat longer than previously anticipated.
As reported in the Bank's summer Business Outlook Survey, almost all firms surveyed expect average inflation over the next two years to remain within the 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range.
Core CPI inflation averaged 2.0 per cent in April and May, down slightly from 2.1 per cent in both the fourth quarter of 2011 and the first quarter of this year.
Alternative measures of core inflation have also been clustered around 2 per cent in recent months.
Core inflation is forecast to remain around 2 per cent over the projection horizon, as the economy operates near its production potential and inflation expectations stay well anchored.
Despite the recent pickup in the growth of wages on a monthly basis, growth in labour compensation is expected to remain moderate and thus contribute to the projected stability in inflation.
Some monthly volatility in core inflation can also be expected in the near term, primarily as a result of the unusually sharp movements in prices for motor vehicles observed a year ago.
Over the projection horizon, the indirect effects associated with the restoration of the provincial sales tax in British Columbia are expected to have a minor effect on core inflation.
Total CPI inflation averaged 1.6 per cent in April and May, down from an average of 2.4 per cent in the first quarter.
This was a larger decline than the Bank had expected, primarily reflecting the impact of the sharper-than-anticipated declines in world oil prices on gasoline prices in Canada.
With futures prices suggesting the persistence of lower oil prices than had been anticipated at the time of the April Report, the Bank now expects total CPI inflation to remain noticeably below the 2 per cent target over the coming year before returning to the target around mid-2013.
Global inflationary pressures could be more persistent than currently projected if potential output in advanced economies is lower than anticipated or if agricultural and other commodity prices are stronger than projected.
Growth in Canadian exports could be stronger than expected, and more in line with the anticipated growth in foreign activity, if Canadian exporters improve their competitiveness more rapidly than currently assumed.
Residential investment in Canada has surprised on the upside, reaching record-high levels, and could have more momentum than currently projected.
The economic expansion in the United States is progressing at a gradual pace.
In China and other major emerging economies, growth has slowed somewhat more than expected, though there are signs of stabilization around current growth rates.
Notwithstanding the slowdown in global economic activity, prices for oil and other commodities produced in Canada have, on average, increased in recent months.
Global financial conditions have improved, supported by aggressive policy actions of major central banks, but sentiment remains fragile.
In Canada, while global headwinds continue to restrain economic activity, domestic factors are supporting a moderate expansion.
Following the recent period of below-potential growth, the economy is expected to pick up and return to full capacity by the end of 2013.
The Bank continues to project that the expansion will be driven mainly by growth in consumption and business investment, reflecting very stimulative domestic financial conditions.
Housing activity is expected to decline from historically high levels, while the household debt burden is expected to rise further before stabilizing by the end of the projection horizon.
Canadian exports are projected to pick up gradually but remain below their pre-recession peak until the first half of 2014, reflecting weak foreign demand and ongoing competitiveness challenges.
These challenges include the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar, which is being influenced by safe-haven flows and spillovers from global monetary policy.
After taking into account revisions to the National Accounts, the Bank projects that the economy will grow by 2.2 per cent in 2012, 2.3 per cent in 2013 and 2.4 per cent in 2014.
Core inflation has been lower than expected in recent months, reflecting somewhat softer prices across a wide range of goods and services.
Core inflation is expected to increase gradually over coming quarters, reaching 2 per cent by the middle of 2013 as the economy gradually absorbs the current small degree of slack, the growth of labour compensation remains moderate and inflation expectations stay well anchored.
Total CPI inflation has fallen noticeably below the 2 per cent target, as expected, and is projected to return to target by the end of 2013, somewhat later than previously anticipated.
The Bank's projection assumes that authorities in Europe are able to contain the ongoing crisis, and that the US fiscal cliff will be avoided.
Imbalances in the Canadian household sector remain the biggest domestic risk.
This risk is two-sided.
The three main upside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the possibility of higher global inflationary pressures, stronger Canadian exports and renewed momentum in Canadian residential investment.
The three main downside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the European crisis, weaker demand for Canadian exports and the possibility that growth in Canadian household spending could be weaker.
Reflecting all of these factors, on 23 October, the Bank decided to maintain the target for the overnight rate at 1 per cent.
Over time, some modest withdrawal of monetary policy stimulus will likely be required, consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target.
The timing and degree of any such withdrawal will be weighed carefully against global and domestic developments, including the evolution of imbalances in the household sector.
The global economy has unfolded broadly as the Bank projected in its July Monetary Policy Report.
While the economic expansion in the United States is progressing at a gradual pace, Europe is in recession, and recent indicators point to continued contraction.
Notwithstanding the slowdown in global economic activity, prices for oil and other commodities produced by Canada have increased, on average, in recent months.
Global financial conditions have improved since the last Report, supported by the aggressive policy actions of major central banks, particularly the US Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan.
Overall sentiment, however, remains fragile.
Following 3.8 per cent growth in 2011, global economic growth is expected to slow to 3.0 per cent in 2012 and 3.1 per cent in 2013, before rising to 3.5 per cent in 2014.
The Bank's base-case scenario continues to be predicated on the following two important assumptions: the crisis in the euro area will remain contained, and a severe tightening of US fiscal policy at the beginning of 2013, the so-called "fiscal cliff," will be avoided.
The Bank's projections incorporate the impact on the global economy of these and other sources of uncertainty.
Underlying global inflationary pressures are expected to ease over the projection horizon, given the considerable excess capacity observed in many advanced economies.
The recent increase in energy and food prices will, however, provide a short-term offset, particularly in emerging-market economies.
Global financial conditions have improved modestly since the last Report, supported by several significant central bank initiatives and reduced concerns about a serious near-term credit event.
Tail risks in the euro area are perceived to have diminished significantly following the ECB's announcement of its Outright Monetary Transactions program, while the announcement by the US Federal Reserve of substantial additional monetary easing has provided further support for some risky assets.
The more positive market tone has been reflected in narrower credit spreads, strong corporate issuance and large gains in many equity markets.
The extraordinary liquidity provided by central banks may also be pushing down measures of financial market volatility.
The OMT program, which allows the ECB to purchase government bonds in the secondary market, is designed to eliminate the risk of euro redenomination and improve the monetary policy transmission mechanism in the euro area.
This action, coupled with other encouraging policy developments in the euro area, has lowered the probability of a severe crisis and has led to a reversal of some safe-haven flows.
As a result, sovereign yields in several peripheral euro-area countries have declined substantially.
Bond yields in peripheral euro-area countries nevertheless continue to be elevated, and significant financial market strains remain.
Notably, there are signs of increasing fragmentation of European financial markets, with reduced cross-border financial activity and an evident home bias in investment portfolios.
Short-term yields in some core European countries are near zero, signalling that investors are still wary and are willing to pay a premium to protect their investments.
In addition, the most recent bank lending survey in the euro area suggests that, in the second quarter, banks continued to tighten credit standards on loans to enterprises and that they expected to tighten standards further in the third quarter for all categories of loans.
In the United States, the Federal Reserve has extended its forward guidance for exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate through to at least mid-2015.
Moreover, in addition to completing the maturity extension program, the Federal Reserve will provide further policy accommodation by purchasing additional agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of US$40 billion per month.
The Fed has indicated that it will continue this MBS purchase program (or undertake additional asset purchases) until there is a substantial improvement in the outlook for the US labour market in a context of price stability.
US credit spreads have continued to narrow recently, with the yields on both investment-grade and high-yield corporate bonds declining to near-record levels, supported by robust investor demand.
Spreads in the MBS market have also tightened substantially following the Federal Reserve announcement.
GDP contracted by 0.7 per cent in the second quarter of 2012, a slightly smaller decline than anticipated in the July Report.
However, economic indicators suggest that the strained economic situation in peripheral economies continues to spread to the core countries.
The euro-area composite Economic Sentiment Indicator and the composite Purchasing Managers' Indexes both fell to near 3-year lows, and the ESIs for France and Germany have continued to slide.
Euro-area activity is projected to contract further in the second half of 2012, and GDP is expected to decline by 0.5 per cent for the year as a whole.
With ongoing bank deleveraging, fiscal austerity measures, tensions in financial markets and low confidence continuing to weigh on the outlook for the euro area, the Bank expects very modest growth of 0.4 and 1.0 per cent in 2013 and 2014, respectively.
Domestic demand in the euro area is anticipated to remain extremely weak, with some offsetting support for economic activity provided by export growth.
However, the level of euro-area GDP is projected to stay below its 2008 peak throughout the 2012-14 period.
Headline inflation in the euro area remained at 2.6 per cent in September, supported by increases in indirect taxes and administered prices in peripheral countries, as well as the recent run-up in energy prices.
Inflation is expected to remain above 2 per cent throughout 2012 and to decline gradually to below 2 per cent over the projection horizon.
While the introduction of the OMT by the ECB provides time for reforms to be implemented, further substantive measures will be needed to continue to contain the crisis and put euro-area economies on a sustainable path.
Fiscal and structural policy adjustments will take several more years to complete, and market confidence will be restored only gradually.
The US economic expansion is continuing at a gradual pace, consistent with the experience of other advanced countries that have undergone severe financial crises.
GDP growth in 2012 is projected to be slightly higher than previously anticipated, owing to historical revisions for late 2011 that affect annual average growth for 2012 and more than offset the negative effects of the severe drought on farm output.
Fiscal consolidation, weak external demand and ongoing household deleveraging will nevertheless continue to restrain growth.
In 2013, growth is projected to accelerate, supported by a pickup in external demand, a gradual improvement in labour market conditions and the recent announcement of additional policy easing by the Federal Reserve.
Relative to the July Report, US GDP growth in 2013 and 2014 has been revised up to 2.3 per cent and 3.2 per cent, respectively, owing to a larger policy response by the Federal Reserve than was previously expected.
These policy measures will support stronger growth over the projection horizon by lowering the cost of credit to consumers and businesses, boosting asset prices and wealth, and putting downward pressure on the US dollar, thus contributing to higher growth in consumption and both residential and non-residential investment than had been anticipated in July.
The Bank's base-case scenario assumes that the drag from fiscal consolidation will amount to roughly 1 percentage point in 2012 and 1.5 percentage points in both 2013 and 2014.
However, a severe tightening of fiscal policy at the beginning of 2013 is built into current legislation, which, if fully implemented, could reduce US real GDP growth next year by approximately 4 percentage points.
The outlook is therefore highly uncertain and is contingent on political willingness to address the impending fiscal cliff.
There are signs that the uncertainty around the fiscal outlook, coupled with the fragile state of the European economy and other worrying external developments, has already begun to affect US economic activity, with firms deciding to delay spending on some investment projects.
Consumption expenditures are expected to grow at a relatively slow but steady pace over the projection horizon.
While the unemployment rate has declined in recent months, partly reflecting a further drop in labour force participation, it remains elevated.
On the positive side, household net worth is gradually being rebuilt, supported by gains in both equity and house prices.
In addition, the household debt-to-income ratio has returned to 2005 levels and the debt-service ratio has reached multi-year lows.
Residential investment has rebounded in recent quarters, albeit from a very depressed level.
Although home-builder sentiment has improved significantly and the number of building permits has climbed above 800,000 for the first time since 2008, housing demand remains subdued.
The significant overhang of unoccupied dwellings, as well as homes in the foreclosure pipeline, continues to restrain new construction and limit upward pressure on prices.
The Bank expects that a gradual easing in lending conditions, improving labour market conditions and underlying demographic demand will support the recovery in residential construction over the projection horizon.
The announcement by the US Federal Reserve that it will purchase mortgage-backed securities will also help in this regard.
The recovery in non-residential construction is expected to proceed at a modest pace, restrained by elevated vacancy rates and tight borrowing conditions.
Growth in investment in equipment and software decelerated markedly in the first two quarters of 2012 and is projected to remain relatively weak in the short term, constrained in part by the uncertainty associated with the global economic outlook and the impending fiscal cliff.
As these negative effects gradually dissipate and GDP growth picks up, growth in business investment is expected to rebound, supported by healthy corporate balance sheets.
This rebound is slightly stronger than forecast in the July Report, owing to the additional monetary stimulus.
US export growth in 2012 has been affected by slowing external demand and the past appreciation of the US real effective exchange rate, but is projected to strengthen gradually starting in the second half of 2013 as global demand growth begins to recover.
Excess supply in the US economy is expected to remain significant until well beyond 2014, dampening underlying inflationary pressures.
Consumer price inflation will increase in the short term, however, reflecting the rapid increase in gasoline prices in recent months and the impact of the rise in food prices associated with the drought that affected vast areas of US farmland.
The additional policy easing by the Federal Reserve will also provide somewhat more support to inflation than previously anticipated.
Real GDP growth in Japan decelerated to 0.7 per cent in the second quarter of 2012 from 5.3 per cent in the first quarter.
The sharp slowdown was in line with expectations at the time of the July Report and reflected a broad-based slowdown in domestic demand, as well as continued weakness in external demand, especially from Europe and China.
The contribution from public investment was also lower in the second quarter; growth in this sector remained strong, however, owing to reconstruction efforts following the natural disasters of March 2011.
Consumer price inflation in Japan remains slightly below zero.
Japan's real GDP growth is projected to average only about 1 per cent in 2013 and 2014.
A strong yen, together with weak growth in foreign demand, is anticipated to weigh on the pace of economic activity in the short term, while a planned increase in the value-added tax on consumption and declining reconstruction-related spending are expected to dampen growth toward the end of the projection horizon.
Real GDP growth in China slowed further in the third quarter of 2012 to 7.4 per cent on a year-over-year basis.
The ongoing slowdown, also reflected in weak industrial production data, is the result of continuing efforts by Chinese authorities to rein in an overheated property market, as well as reduced external demand, particularly from Europe.
China's economy is expected to grow at a pace of about 7.7 per cent over the projection horizon.
This represents a slight pickup from the recent rate of growth, but is a somewhat weaker forecast than in the July Report.
Government spending on infrastructure should provide some support to growth over the projection period, but likely to a more limited extent than the stimulus measures introduced during the previous slowdown.
Near-term growth in exports is expected to be dampened by weak activity in a number of advanced economies before picking up in mid-2013.
Some additional slowing in housing is anticipated, although there is evidence that the housing market has recently stabilized, following a significant deceleration in activity.
Inflationary pressures in China appear well contained, with consumer price inflation at only 1.9 per cent in September compared with 6.1 per cent a year ago.
However, since food represents a large portion of household expenditures, rising world food prices caused by severe droughts in a number of major food-producing countries are expected to exert significant upward pressure on China's inflation in coming quarters.
Although the People's Bank of China eased monetary policy earlier this year, higher inflation due to rising food prices may limit the scope for further easing.
Significant monetary policy easing may also be constrained by the fear of exacerbating existing domestic imbalances, particularly in the housing sector.
Economic activity in several other large EMEs is also slowing in response to both external and domestic factors.
After registering the lowest GDP growth since the financial crisis, activity in India appears to be weakening further, reflecting softer private consumption and investment.
Owing to reduced near-term inflationary pressures, many EMEs have lowered their policy interest rates.
As in China, however, further easing could be tempered by expected increases in food prices and still elevated credit growth.
Economic growth in the other large EMEs is expected to pick up gradually in the second half of 2013 as a result of the recent policy easing and somewhat stronger export markets.
A rise in crude oil prices and a rebound in base metal prices, both partly related to the announcement of new policy stimulus measures in several countries, account for much of the recent movement.
Oil prices measured by the Brent crude benchmark are about 23 per cent higher than the trough reached at the end of June, boosted by temporary supply disruptions in the North Sea and tensions in the Middle East.
In contrast, while higher relative to their July level, crude oil prices captured by the West Texas Intermediate benchmark have fallen in recent weeks, reflecting strong supply conditions in North America.
The latest futures curves suggest that the spread between Brent crude oil prices and WTI prices will gradually narrow over the projection horizon, owing to some normalization of supply conditions.
Relative to the July Report, futures curves also indicate that Brent and WTI oil prices will be about 10 per cent and 5 per cent higher, respectively, through 2014.
Natural gas prices in North America have also risen since the July Report but, at a little above US$3 per million Btu, are still low as new fracking technologies continue to drive an expansion of supply.
Based on the latest futures curve, natural gas prices are projected to continue to rise through 2014, similar to expectations in July.
Prices for non-energy commodities are also higher, on average, than in July, and are projected to stay above the levels anticipated at the time of the last Report through 2014, although substantial variation has been observed across some commodity groups over the past few months.
Base metal prices have increased sharply since mid-August, offsetting part of the significant decline in prices observed earlier in the year.
These prices are expected to continue increasing, albeit at a slower pace, over the projection horizon.
Prices for agricultural products have broadly stabilized since the July Report after a drought-related spike.
While agricultural prices are expected to remain elevated through mid-2013, they are projected to decline thereafter as supply conditions improve.
Prices for forestry products, after rising through August, have returned to the levels observed at the time of the July Report.
Over the next two years, the prices of forestry products are expected to improve gradually, supported by the recovery of the US housing sector.
External demand for Canada's exports, as estimated by the Bank's foreign activity measure, remains modest.
The measure has recovered only 60 per cent of the decline recorded during the 2008-09 recession, owing largely to protracted weakness in the US housing sector.
Despite the relatively subdued outlook for global economic growth, the foreign activity measure is projected to grow steadily over the next two years, reflecting a gradual recovery in the US housing market and an anticipated increase in the growth of US business investment once the uncertainty related to the fiscal cliff and the situation in Europe dissipates.
Owing to the annual revisions to US data, the level of the foreign activity measure is slightly lower than previously expected in the second quarter of 2012.
However, upward revisions to the Bank's outlook for the US economy imply stronger growth in the foreign activity measure over the projection horizon.
The foreign activity measure is expected to surpass its pre-recession level during the second half of 2013.
The Bank of Canada's commodity price index has increased by approximately 6 per cent since July, contributing to an improvement in Canada's terms of trade.
Prices received by Canadian producers of heavy crude oil, Western Canada Select , are up 13 per cent, owing in part to the resolution of pipeline and refinery outages that had previously weighed on prices.
As a result, the spread between WCS and WTI has narrowed significantly.
A projected rise in natural gas prices and the continued recovery in base metal prices are expected to be offset by a gradual decrease in crude oil prices and some easing in agricultural prices.
The Canadian dollar has averaged 101 cents US since the July Report, higher than the 98 cents US assumed in July, and is assumed to average 101 cents US over the projection horizon.
While global headwinds continue to restrain Canadian economic activity, domestic factors are supporting a moderate expansion.
Following the recent period of below-potential growth, the Bank expects the economy to pick up in coming quarters, returning to full capacity by the end of 2013.
The Bank continues to anticipate that the expansion will be driven mainly by growth in consumption and business investment, reflecting very stimulative domestic financial conditions.
Housing activity is expected to decline from historically high levels, and household debt ratios are expected to rise further before stabilizing by the end of the projection horizon.
Canadian exports are projected to pick up gradually but remain below their pre-recession peak until the first half of 2014, reflecting the weak level of foreign demand and ongoing competitiveness challenges.
Core inflation is expected to increase gradually over coming quarters, reaching 2 per cent by the middle of 2013 as the current small degree of slack in the economy is gradually absorbed, the growth of labour compensation stays moderate and inflation expectations remain well anchored.
In a context of somewhat improved global financial conditions, the supply and price of credit for businesses and households in Canada remain very stimulative, providing important ongoing support to the economic expansion.
Canadian financial markets have benefited from the modest reduction in global risk aversion in recent months.
The S&P/TSX Composite Index has risen by roughly 8 per cent since the July Report, and volatility has diminished.
Credit spreads on Canadian corporate bonds have continued to narrow, more than offsetting the slight increase in Canadian government bond yields.
As a result, all-in corporate bond yields have fallen to record lows, and the volume of corporate bond issuance has remained robust.
Canadian banks continue to be well positioned to lend, with ready access to low-cost funding across the term structure in both Canadian and foreign currencies, on both a relative and absolute basis.
Responses to the Bank's latest Senior Loan Officer Survey and the balance of opinion of Canadian firms surveyed in the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey both suggest some further easing in business lending conditions in recent months, extending a period of almost uninterrupted easing since late 2009.
With financing conditions for Canadian firms remaining highly favourable, overall business credit has expanded in recent months at a rate above its historical average.
However, the demand for credit stemming from the solid growth in business investment continues to be tempered by the historically high cash position of non-financial firms.
Household credit continues to be readily available at near-record low rates.
Growth in household credit has remained relatively stable at around 5.5 per cent since the beginning of the year, a pace below the historical average, following an extended period of rapid growth that led to a substantial buildup in household debt.
Regulatory measures implemented in recent months are expected to moderate the growth of household credit somewhat.
Nevertheless, the household debt-to-income ratio is expected to continue to rise before stabilizing by the end of the projection horizon.
While growth in the narrow monetary aggregates remains moderate compared with the unusually rapid pace observed in late 2011, it has edged up in recent months, suggesting a slightly greater degree of liquidity preference, particularly among companies.
Growth in the broad monetary aggregates has also picked up from earlier in the year, although it continues to be consistent with relatively subdued inflationary pressures ahead.
The Bank's projection for the growth of potential output in Canada over the 2012-14 period is unchanged from the projection in the October 2011 Report.
Potential output growth is expected to increase from 2.0 per cent in 2012 to 2.2 per cent in 2014.
As a result of the recovery in investment spending, as well as efficiency gains, trend productivity is projected to improve as Canadian firms strive to adopt best practices in the face of competitive pressures.
At the same time, demographic forces will continue to reduce the trend rate of labour input growth.
While real GDP growth of 1.9 per cent in the second quarter was broadly in line with the growth of potential output, as expected, historical revisions to the National Accounts suggest slightly less economic slack in Canada through 2011 and early 2012 than previously estimated.
However, real GDP growth is estimated to have been weaker than anticipated at around 1.0 per cent in the third quarter, partly reflecting the impact on Canadian exports of transitory disruptions in the energy sector.
Consistent with these dynamics, the Bank's conventional measure of the output gap widened slightly to -0.7 per cent in the third quarter.
Responses to the Bank's Business Outlook Survey in recent quarters have shown that the proportion of firms that would have difficulty meeting an unexpected increase in demand has stayed close to its historical average, and while the proportion of firms reporting labour shortages has edged up, it is still slightly below its historical average.
Despite solid gains in employment, the unemployment rate has been broadly steady over the past year, at a level consistent with a modest degree of slack in the economy.
Moreover, both the duration of unemployment and the proportion of involuntary part-time workers continue to be elevated.
On balance, the Bank judges that the economy was operating at roughly two-thirds of a per cent below its production capacity in the third quarter of 2012, a slightly larger degree of slack than expected in July.
The Bank expects growth in the Canadian economy to pick up in coming quarters to a somewhat faster pace than that of its production potential.
On an average annual basis, real GDP growth is forecast to increase from 2.2 per cent in 2012 to 2.3 per cent in 2013 and 2.4 per cent in 2014.
Although available indicators suggest that growth in the third quarter of this year was weaker than expected, the annual growth rate for 2012 is higher than in the July Report, owing largely to revisions that show stronger growth in the third and fourth quarters of 2011 than previously estimated.
The Bank continues to anticipate that consumption and business fixed investment will be the primary drivers of real GDP growth over the projection horizon, supported by accommodative domestic financial conditions.
The pickup in growth from its trough in the third quarter of this year is expected to be driven primarily by a modest increase in net exports.
This balances ongoing competitiveness challenges with the projected improvement in the growth of foreign activity, which is expected to pick up from an average rate of 3.5 per cent over the second and third quarters of 2012 to roughly 7 per cent over the projection horizon.
The outlook for final domestic demand is slightly weaker than in the July Report, although the changes are relatively small.
While the recent further easing in financial conditions and the favourable effects of higher terms of trade on Canadian incomes and wealth should provide additional support to domestic demand, recent indicators suggest slightly less momentum in residential and business fixed investment than previously projected.
Growth in household spending has been moderate.
Growth in consumption, which was weak through the first half of 2012, is estimated to have picked up in the third quarter.
Housing investment declined in the second and third quarters, following strong gains over the previous three quarters.
Nonetheless, with signs of overbuilding, the level of housing investment still remains near historical highs.
It is possible that the elevated level of household debt is beginning to induce a more cautious attitude among Canadian households.
As a result, the Bank's outlook for growth in household spending is little changed from the July Report, despite the supportive impact of improved financial conditions and higher terms of trade in recent months.
Growth in consumption is thus expected to be moderate over the projection horizon, at a rate slightly below that of disposable income, resulting in a small increase in the personal savings rate.
Residential investment is projected to contract, with its share of the overall economy declining from the current elevated level.
In this regard, the measures implemented in recent months by federal authorities are expected to contribute to a more sustainable housing market in Canada.
The comprehensive revisions to the System of National Accounts did not alter the recent broad profile of household spending.
The household savings rate is now estimated to have been higher in recent years than previously reported, although it is generally lower than previously estimated prior to 2006.
In addition, household net worth is now estimated to be higher than previously reported, showing a stronger recovery since the recession.
Finally, the household debt-to-income ratio is now estimated to be 161 per cent as of the second quarter of 2012, a more elevated level than previously thought.
This forecast reflects the strong financial positions of Canadian firms, favourable credit conditions, high commodity prices and the strong Canadian dollar, as well as the impetus to improve productivity amid heightened pressures to become more competitive.
Although these factors have been marginally more supportive to the outlook for capital spending in recent months, the projected growth profile for business fixed investment is somewhat less robust than in the July Report.
This is mainly because global economic uncertainty appears to be having a larger impact on the capital spending plans of Canadian businesses, as reflected in the less-positive responses to the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey.
Moreover, many firms reported that following the recent completion of significant projects, they would now focus on achieving a more intensive use of existing capital.
Government spending is expected to contribute modestly to real GDP growth over the projection horizon.
As in the July base-case scenario, these contributions are projected to be considerably weaker than has been typical historically, in line with the plans of federal and provincial governments to consolidate spending.
Growth in Canada's exports is projected to pick up but remain relatively moderate despite stronger growth in foreign activity, owing to ongoing competitiveness challenges, including the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar.
As a result, the level of Canada's exports is not forecast to regain its pre-recession peak until the first half of 2014.
In contrast, the level of imports has already returned to its pre-recession peak.
Partly as a result, Canada's current account balance has declined from a surplus before the recession to a deficit of around 4 per cent of GDP.
This sizable current account deficit, which has been somewhat larger in recent quarters than previously estimated, is projected to diminish gradually over the forecast horizon.
The projected growth in exports is slightly stronger than in the July Report, with the higher assumed value of the Canadian dollar only partly offsetting the stronger-than-anticipated growth profile for US business investment and the somewhat firmer recovery from low levels of US demand for housing and automobiles.
The projected growth in imports is similar to July, despite the higher assumed value for the Canadian dollar, reflecting the marginally weaker outlook for domestic demand.
As a result, the projected contribution to real GDP growth from net exports is slightly higher than in the July Report, although it remains relatively modest.
Given the above projection for real GDP, the Canadian economy is expected to gradually absorb the currently small amount of slack in coming quarters, reaching full capacity by the end of 2013, slightly later than in the July Report.
Core CPI inflation averaged 1.5 per cent in the third quarter, down from an average of 2.0 per cent in the first half of the year.
Alternative measures of core inflation have also fallen below 2 per cent in recent months.
The decline in core CPI inflation has been greater than anticipated, reflecting somewhat softer prices across a wide range of goods and services.
In contrast, gasoline prices have been firmer than expected in recent months, reflecting both higher world prices for crude oil and higher margins.
As a result, total CPI inflation was in line with the Bank's expectations at 1.2 per cent in the third quarter, down from 1.6 per cent in the second quarter and 2.4 per cent in the first quarter.
The October Consensus Economics forecasts for total CPI inflation in 2012 and 2013 were 1.8 per cent and 1.9 per cent, respectively.
As reported in the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey, almost all firms surveyed continue to expect average inflation over the next two years to remain within the 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range.
Core inflation is expected to remain subdued in the near term before increasing gradually in coming quarters to reach 2 per cent by the middle of 2013, as the economy gradually absorbs the current small degree of slack and inflation expectations remain well anchored.
In addition, growth in labour compensation is expected to stay moderate, consistent with recent trends in wage growth, thus contributing to the projected stability in inflation.
As previously assumed, the indirect effects associated with the restoration of the provincial sales tax in British Columbia are expected to have a minor effect on core inflation over the projection horizon.
This projection for core inflation is weaker than in the July Report.
Similarly, total CPI inflation is expected to remain below 2 per cent for a somewhat longer period than previously anticipated, converging to the target by the end of 2013.
In addition to the lower profile for core inflation, this reflects a larger expected decline in gasoline prices from current elevated levels over the bulk of the projection horizon.
Chart 39 and Chart 40 depict the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the fourth quarter of 2012 to the end of 2014.
In particular, the Bank's projection assumes that authorities in Europe are able to contain the ongoing crisis, and that the US fiscal cliff will be avoided.
Global inflationary pressures could be more persistent than currently projected if potential output in advanced economies is lower than anticipated or if the substantial, additional monetary policy stimulus provided by major central banks boosts prices more than expected.
Growth in Canadian exports could be stronger than expected if exporters improve their competitiveness more rapidly than currently assumed or if output growth in the United States is stronger than projected.
While residential investment in Canada has softened recently after reaching record-high levels, it could regain momentum, thereby reinforcing existing imbalances.
Demand for Canadian exports could be weaker than expected if the authorities in the United States do not smooth the path of fiscal consolidation to avoid the fiscal cliff, if the slowdown in emerging-market economies is greater than expected, or if unconventional policy measures undertaken by foreign authorities have an outsized effect on exchange rates.
The global economic outlook is slightly weaker than the Bank projected in its October Monetary Policy Report.
At the same time, global tail risks have diminished.
The economic expansion in the United States is continuing at a gradual pace, restrained by ongoing public and private deleveraging, global weakness and, more recently, by the uncertainty related to fiscal negotiations.
Despite a marked improvement in peripheral sovereign debt markets, Europe remains in recession, and recent indicators point to a somewhat more protracted downturn than expected in October.
While growth in China is improving, economic activity has been slowing further in some other major emerging economies.
Global economic growth is estimated to have slowed markedly in 2012, falling to 3.0 per cent, from 3.9 per cent in 2011.
In 2013, the global economy is projected to continue to grow modestly, at a rate of 2.9 per cent, before picking up to 3.5 per cent in 2014.
The Bank's base-case scenario is predicated on the assumptions that the crisis in the euro area will remain contained and that a severe tightening of US fiscal policy will be avoided.
Overall, recent developments support these assumptions.
Considerable excess capacity in some advanced economies and the absence of underlying inflationary pressures have led central banks in these countries to undertake additional unconventional measures while maintaining historically low policy interest rates.
Supported by these actions and by positive policy developments in Europe, global financial conditions have improved, and commodity prices have stayed at historically elevated levels.
Global financial conditions have improved since the last Report and are increasingly supportive of growth.
Investors continue to be cautious, however, reflecting ongoing concerns about the prospects for global economic growth, policy implementation in the euro area, and uncertainty surrounding the US fiscal outlook and debt-ceiling negotiations.
Trading volumes across asset classes have generally been low in recent months, with many market participants preferring to sit on the sidelines.
In the euro area, positive developments have led to a significant easing in financial conditions since the October Report.
Euro-area finance ministers (the Eurogroup) have agreed to disburse the next loan tranche to Greece from the European Financial Stability Facility and to further support Greece's debt sustainability by lengthening the term of the loans and lowering the interest rate.
European Union finance ministers also reached an agreement on a common bank supervisory framework for the euro area.
Moreover, peripheral euro-area sovereign bonds and European equity markets have performed well since the October Report.
Yields on 10-year bonds for most peripheral euro-area countries have declined sharply, returning to levels recorded in late 2010, and euro-area stock market indexes have outperformed those of most other major economies.
Significant risks nevertheless remain.
There are signs of continuing fragmentation in the European financial system, which is contributing to a divergence in borrowing rates across countries, and the most recent bank lending survey in the euro area suggests that banks continue to tighten credit standards on loans to businesses.
In the United States, the Federal Reserve announced its intention to provide further policy accommodation through purchases of longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of US$45 billion per month.
This new initiative, which replaces the recently expired Maturity Extension Program, was in line with market expectations.
The Federal Reserve also modified its forward guidance by linking future rate increases to specific thresholds for economic indicators (instead of providing a conditional time horizon).
The federal funds rate is thus expected to stay at exceptionally low levels at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6.5 per cent, subject to projected inflation one and two years ahead remaining below 2.5 per cent and longer-term inflation expectations continuing to be well anchored.
Sentiment improved in US financial markets following the partial resolution of the fiscal cliff, with yields on Treasuries and other major government bonds increasing markedly, especially at the long end of the yield curve.
US financial conditions nevertheless remain supportive of growth, with corporate credit yields near record-low levels despite the rise in Treasuries.
US high-yield spreads have narrowed further, and issuance has remained exceptionally robust, underpinned by strong investor demand for corporate bonds.
While the debate over the fiscal cliff put downward pressure on US equity prices toward the end of 2012, they have since rebounded, reflecting the recent improvement in market sentiment.
US GDP growth accelerated to 3.1 per cent in the third quarter of 2012.
Temporary increases in defence spending and a strong contribution from inventory investment more than offset a decline in business fixed investment, which partly reflected ongoing uncertainty surrounding the future course of fiscal policy.
However, the Bank estimates that US GDP growth slowed sharply in the fourth quarter of 2012, dampened by weak external demand, the persistent drag from elevated uncertainty and the effects of Hurricane Sandy.
On an average annual basis, GDP growth is projected to reach 2.1 per cent in 2013 and 3.1 per cent in 2014, revised down slightly from the October Report.
Growth is supported by highly accommodative monetary policy, a reduction in uncertainty associated with fiscal policy, continuing improvement in the housing market and a gradual pickup in external demand.
Nevertheless, fiscal consolidation and, to a lesser degree, household deleveraging will continue to restrain activity.
Overall, the US economy is projected to expand at a relatively modest pace, consistent with other economies that have experienced severe financial crises.
Fiscal consolidation will exert a significant drag on US economic growth, as expected in the October Report.
Although the adoption of the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012 means that the fiscal cliff has, to a large extent, been avoided, negotiations on other important issues are ongoing, and much uncertainty remains.
The Bank continues to assume that US fiscal policy will subtract roughly 1.5 percentage points from growth in both 2013 and 2014.
US households have made considerable progress in repairing their balance sheets.
However, while the drag from household deleveraging is expected to diminish over the projection horizon, tighter fiscal policy and a gradual improvement in employment suggest that consumer expenditures will grow only modestly.
Residential investment, in contrast, has rebounded strongly in recent quarters, albeit from historically low levels.
Home-builder sentiment has improved significantly, and the number of housing starts is well above the level recorded a year ago.
US business fixed investment slowed markedly through the first three quarters of 2012 as a result of the heightened uncertainty associated with the fiscal outlook.
A rapid increase in investment spending is expected in mid-2013, supported by healthy corporate balance sheets and record-low corporate yields.
The level of investment is projected to be lower than was expected at the time of the October Report, however, reflecting a larger and more persistent impact from elevated excess capacity and tight borrowing conditions in the commercial real estate sector.
US export growth is projected to remain weak in early 2013, constrained by sluggish demand from major trading partners, especially Europe.
A gradual rebound is expected beginning in the middle of the year as global demand starts to recover.
Exports are nevertheless somewhat lower than previously anticipated, consistent with downward revisions to the outlooks for both Canada and the euro area.
Although US imports are expected to pick up with the improvement in domestic demand, overseas energy imports will be dampened by increased production from domestic sources.
Euro-area GDP contracted by 0.3 per cent in the third quarter of 2012, its fourth consecutive decline, and recent indicators point to a deepening recession in the fourth quarter.
Despite improving market sentiment, the euro-area economy is expected to remain very weak, with bank deleveraging, fiscal austerity, financial market tensions and heightened uncertainty weighing on the growth of domestic demand.
Recent data on real activity, as well as the latest bank credit data, suggest that the economic recovery will be slower than originally thought, in part because fiscal austerity measures and tight credit conditions are taking a greater-than-expected toll on economic activity.
Even with some recent moderation, headline inflation remains slightly above the European Central Bank's target of "below, but close to, 2 per cent," boosted by high energy prices and increases in indirect taxes and administered prices in some euro-area countries.
However, inflation is expected to fall below 2 per cent in 2013 following the runoff of these temporary factors, as significant excess capacity continues to dampen price pressures.
Although the tail risks associated with Europe have diminished, substantial fiscal and structural adjustments will be needed over an extended period to contain the crisis and put the euro area onto a sustainable path.
As a result, market and business confidence will likely be restored only gradually.
Real GDP in Japan fell by 3.5 per cent in the third quarter of 2012, owing to a sharp decline in both exports and private domestic demand.
While some of the recent weakness can be attributed to geopolitical tensions with China, the contraction was more pronounced and more broadly based than anticipated in October.
Real GDP is expected to grow at a modest pace through 2013 and 2014.
A gradual pickup in foreign demand, aided by a return to more normal relations with China and the lagged effects of the recent depreciation of the yen, is expected to boost economic activity.
Domestic demand continues to rely on macro policies for growth, with new monetary and fiscal measures more than offsetting the waning support from post-earthquake spending on reconstruction.
However, the planned increase in the value-added tax on consumption is expected to dampen growth in 2014.
Real GDP growth in China picked up in the fourth quarter, increasing to 7.9 per cent on a year-over-year basis, consistent with the recent improvement in industrial production.
This rebound follows a gradual deceleration over the past three years, driven mainly by reduced growth in foreign demand and, more recently, efforts by Chinese authorities to rein in an overheated property market.
As in the October Report, economic growth is expected to stabilize in a range of 7.5 per cent to 8 per cent through 2014, supported in the near term by announced fiscal policy measures and strong credit growth and, subsequently, by a pickup in global demand.
In addition, healthy wage increases should help boost domestic consumption.
Investment growth, on the other hand, is expected to slow gradually, owing in part to more modest spending on housing.
Policy-makers will likely be cautious about providing additional stimulus in order to avoid exacerbating existing imbalances in the economy.
With consumer price inflation at 2.5 per cent in December, inflationary pressures in China remain contained.
In coming months, however, rising world food prices, caused by severe droughts in a number of major food-producing countries, are expected to exert upward pressure on China's rate of inflation.
In other emerging-market economies , such as Brazil, India and Russia, the pace of economic activity has continued to slow or has stagnated.
Domestically, declining investment growth continues to weigh on activity, reflecting slow progress in implementing structural reforms, tight financing conditions and, in some cases, the lagged impact of past policy tightening.
Although some EMEs have entered 2013 with solid momentum, there is still significant regional differentiation.
The slight improvement in growth prospects is mainly concentrated in emerging Asia and parts of Latin America, while activity in emerging Europe continues to slow, given its close links with the euro area.
Economic growth in EMEs is thus expected to be relatively modest through the first half of 2013 before gradually picking up as export markets strengthen somewhat and monetary and fiscal policies provide support.
New fiscal measures are being implemented in Korea and Brazil, and most EMEs have the fiscal capacity to provide additional stimulus if needed.
Global prices for crude oil, as measured by the Brent benchmark, have fluctuated within a relatively narrow range since the October Report, and continue to be boosted by tensions in the Middle East.
Although still depressed by excess supply conditions in North America, the West Texas Intermediate benchmark has increased steadily since mid-December, leading to a narrower discount relative to Brent.
The latest futures curves suggest a modest decline in Brent crude oil prices over the projection horizon as geopolitical tensions abate, while WTI prices are expected to remain relatively flat.
Progress toward alleviating the current supply glut should result in a further gradual narrowing of the spread between these two benchmarks.
While natural gas prices are still very low at US$3.50 per million Btu, they are well above the decade low recorded in April 2012.
This increase largely reflects significant progress on the switchover from coal to natural gas for electricity generation.
Natural gas prices retreated somewhat in December, owing to warmer-than-expected weather conditions, but have rebounded recently and are now close to the levels observed at the time of the October Report.
The futures curve indicates a steady rise in natural gas prices to slightly above US$4 per million Btu by the end of 2014, similar to expectations in October.
Base metals prices are little changed since the last Report, but are expected to rise gradually in coming years, supported by continued steady growth in demand from EMEs.
Prices for forestry products, in contrast, have surged by more than 10 per cent since mid-October and are projected to increase further in tandem with the recovery in the US housing sector.
Although prices for agricultural products are also projected to rise through mid-2013, reflecting a delayed increase in livestock prices following the drought in 2012, they should ease thereafter as the supply of grains begins to normalize.
Prices for non-energy commodities have been revised up slightly over the projection horizon, relative to the October Report.
External demand for Canada's manufacturing exports remains quite modest relative to its pre-recession level, largely because of the still-low level of activity in the US housing sector.
As the US housing market recovers and business investment activity strengthens, the foreign activity measure is expected to accelerate and grow at a faster pace than US GDP.
Owing to the downward revision to the projected profile for US business fixed investment, the level of external demand for Canadian goods is anticipated to remain below expectations at the time of the October Report.
Despite rising WTI oil prices, the Bank of Canada's commodity price index is little changed since mid-October, with the marked decline in the prices received by Canadian producers of heavy crude oil offsetting the sharp increase in the prices of forestry products.
Constraints on pipeline capacity and refinery outages have pushed the price of Western Canada Select down from US$78 per barrel to slightly less than US$60 per barrel.
These developments have put pressure on Canada's terms of trade and real gross domestic income, and have contributed to the recent slowdown in engineering investment in Canada.
The BCPI is expected to rise modestly over the projection horizon, as WCS prices move higher in response to easing constraints on refinery and pipeline capacity.
Gradually rising prices for natural gas and base metals, as well as further gains in the prices of forestry products, are also expected to contribute to the increase in the BCPI.
Given the lower projected prices for domestically produced oil, however, the BCPI is expected to remain below the level anticipated at the time of the October Report over most of the projection horizon.
The Canadian dollar has traded within a relatively narrow range since the October Report, averaging 101 cents US, the same level as assumed in October.
It is assumed to remain at this level over the projection horizon.
The slowdown in the Canadian economy in the second half of 2012 was more pronounced than the Bank had anticipated at the time of the October Report.
While global tail risks have diminished, foreign demand has been more subdued than expected.
At the same time, the less-favourable prices received by Canadian energy producers, together with the continued elevated level of uncertainty, have led to slower growth in final domestic demand.
As anticipated, Canadian households have shown a more cautious attitude toward spending.
The Bank projects a return to above-potential growth in the Canadian economy through 2013, supported in particular by rebounds in business fixed investment and exports.
The projected level of exports nonetheless remains below its pre-recession peak until the second half of 2014, owing to the weak level of foreign demand and competitiveness challenges, including the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar.
Growth in consumption is expected to be maintained at a moderate pace, while residential investment is still expected to decline from historically high levels.
The Bank expects trend growth in household credit to moderate further, with the debt-to-income ratio stabilizing near current levels.
Although the Bank still sees a rebound in the growth of real GDP, economic activity in Canada is expected to be more restrained than projected in the October Report.
As a result, the economy is now forecast to return to full capacity only in the second half of 2014.
Core inflation has softened more than the Bank had expected.
More muted price pressures across a wide range of goods and services have been observed, consistent with the unexpected increase in excess capacity in the Canadian economy and greater competitive pressures among retailers.
Total CPI inflation has also been lower than anticipated, reflecting developments in core inflation and weaker-than-projected gasoline prices.
Total inflation is expected to remain around 1 per cent in the near term before rising gradually, along with core inflation, to the 2 per cent target in the second half of 2014 as the economy returns to full capacity and inflation expectations remain well anchored.
This inflation projection is weaker than in the October Report, owing to greater excess supply in the Canadian economy over most of the projection horizon, as well as the anticipated persistence of recent relative price shocks in coming quarters.
Against a backdrop of some further improvement in global financial conditions, the supply and price of credit for businesses and households in Canada remain very stimulative, providing important ongoing support to the economic expansion.
Canadian financial markets have remained strong in recent months.
Yields on both Canadian government and corporate bonds have stayed at exceptionally low levels, partly because of sustained international demand for the debt of Canadian governments, banks and corporations, a sign that their credit quality is perceived to be high by global standards.
In this context, the volume of corporate bond issuance has picked up in recent months, and issuance for 2012 as a whole reached its highest level since 2007.
Moreover, the S&P/TSX Composite Index has remained firm since the October Report, following significant gains during the summer months, and volatility has been relatively low.
Canadian banks continue to be well positioned to lend, with ready access to low-cost funding across the term structure in both Canadian and foreign currencies.
Responses to the Bank's latest Senior Loan Officer Survey and the balance of opinion of Canadian firms surveyed in the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey together suggest that business-lending conditions have changed little in recent months, following a period of almost uninterrupted easing since late 2009.
With highly favourable financing conditions for Canadian firms, the pace of expansion of overall business credit has picked up to a rate well above its historical average.
While this is consistent with a return to more rapid growth in business fixed investment, the pickup in business credit growth can be partly explained by transitory influences.
These include an increase in the need for working capital due to higher inventories and the early refinancing of corporate debt at favourable interest rate levels.
The growth of household credit has nonetheless slowed from around 5.5 per cent through much of 2012 to just above 3 per cent in the three months to November.
This is the lowest rate of growth since 1999, and reflects a slowdown in the growth of both residential mortgage and consumer credit.
A number of factors have contributed to the slowing trend in household credit growth to slightly below 5 per cent on a year-over-year basis from a peak of over 12 per cent in 2008.
These factors include the consequences of the pulling forward of housing activity due to improved affordability, the cumulative effects of changes to mortgage insurance rules and the tightening of mortgage underwriting guidelines, and increasing consumer appreciation of the dangers of elevated debt levels.
Even with the recent slowing, household credit still grew slightly faster than disposable income in the third quarter, resulting in a further rise in the aggregate household debt-to-income ratio to 165 per cent.
Despite the continued high level of uncertainty surrounding the global economic outlook and the associated preference for liquidity, growth in the narrow monetary aggregates has slowed considerably in recent months, coinciding with the weak GDP growth registered in the second half of 2012.
Growth in the broad monetary aggregates has also moderated and is consistent with subdued inflationary pressures ahead.
Various indicators point to an increase in excess capacity in the Canadian economy through the second half of 2012.
Real GDP growth slowed slightly more than expected to 0.6 per cent in the third quarter, and is estimated to have been 1.0 per cent in the fourth quarter, significantly below the October forecast.
Exports and business fixed investment were particularly weak, offset somewhat by an unexpectedly large rise in inventory investment.
Largely as a result, the level of real GDP at the end of 2012 is 0.6 per cent below that expected in the October Report.
Consistent with these dynamics, the Bank's conventional measure of the output gap widened to -1.1 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2012.
Responses to the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey also point to a recent increase in economic slack.
The proportion of firms that would have difficulty meeting an unexpected increase in demand has fallen sharply, albeit from a level around its historical average in recent quarters.
The proportion of firms reporting labour shortages has also declined, to a level well below its historical average.
In contrast, labour market indicators more broadly do not suggest an increase in the degree of excess capacity in the Canadian economy in recent quarters.
With solid gains in employment, the unemployment rate has edged down in recent months, to a level consistent with a modest degree of slack in the economy.
Nonetheless, the average duration of unemployment and the proportion of involuntary part-time workers have remained at elevated levels, while average hours worked remain relatively low.
On balance, the Bank judges that the economy was operating about 1 per cent below its production capacity in the fourth quarter of 2012, a larger degree of slack than expected in October.
The Bank expects growth in the Canadian economy to pick up this year.
The anticipated rebound through the first half of the year mainly reflects stronger foreign demand and the unwinding of temporary factors that restrained activity in the resource sector in the second half of 2012.
Consumption is expected to grow at a moderate pace, while business fixed investment accelerates.
The Bank projects that net exports will contribute positively to GDP growth in 2013 and 2014 after unexpectedly detracting from growth in 2012.
This contribution is nevertheless modest, reflecting the persistence of external headwinds.
On an average annual basis, real GDP is forecast to grow by 2.0 per cent in 2013, up slightly from 1.9 per cent in 2012.
With the quarterly pace of growth rising through 2013, average annual growth of 2.7 per cent is projected in 2014.
The level of economic activity is lower than in the October Report through most of the projection period.
Final domestic demand has been revised down, mainly reflecting the adverse impact on business fixed investment of more persistent uncertainty regarding the global economic outlook and less-favourable terms of trade.
The profile for exports is also revised down relative to the October Report as a result of the downward revision to foreign activity, although imports are also weaker than previously anticipated.
Growth in household spending proceeded at a moderate pace in the second half of 2012, broadly in line with expectations.
Consumption picked up following weakness in the first half of the year, with a rebound in purchases of motor vehicles and stronger growth in spending by Canadian consumers abroad.
In contrast, housing investment began to decline from historically high levels.
Housing starts have also declined from very high levels, decreasing from roughly 225,000 units through much of 2012 to about 200,000 units in November and December.
However, home building still remains above demographic demand, which is estimated at around 185,000.
Ongoing strong rates of construction, particularly of multiple-unit dwellings in some regions, continue to point to overbuilding.
Despite some softening in house prices, valuations in some segments of the housing market remain stretched.
The outlook for household spending is broadly unchanged from the October Report, although there is a slight dampening impact from the less-favourable terms of trade and associated income and wealth effects.
The Bank's outlook for growth in household spending continues to include some ongoing restraint by Canadian households related to high levels of debt.
Consumption is expected to grow at a moderate rate, somewhat below that of disposable income, resulting in a further slight increase in the personal savings rate.
Residential investment is projected to continue to contract, with its share of the overall economy declining gradually over the projection horizon.
Growth in business fixed investment is expected to return gradually to a more solid pace through 2013, following unexpected weakness in the second half of 2012, which was primarily concentrated in engineering activity related to the energy sector.
The outlook for investment continues to be supported by the strong aggregate financial position of Canadian firms, favourable credit conditions, relatively high commodity prices and the strong Canadian dollar, as well as the impetus to improve productivity amid heightened pressures to become more competitive.
As a result, the projected profile for business fixed investment is lower than in the October Report.
Government spending is expected to contribute only modestly to real GDP growth over the projection horizon.
As in October, this contribution is considerably weaker than has been typical historically, in line with the plans of federal and provincial governments to consolidate spending.
The recovery in net exports is expected to remain weak, although the Bank continues to anticipate some improvement over the projection horizon.
Some rebound in exports is expected in coming quarters, consistent with the projected reacceleration in the foreign activity measure.
Nevertheless, the growth of exports remains more moderate than that of foreign activity, owing to ongoing competitiveness challenges, including the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar, which is being influenced by safe-haven flows and spillovers from global monetary policy.
As a result, the level of Canada's exports is not forecast to regain its pre-recession peak until the second half of 2014.
The profile for imports has also been revised down, owing to the weaker outlook for business investment and exports.
In contrast to exports, the level of imports had already returned to its pre-recession peak by the first quarter of 2011.
Partly as a result, Canada's current account balance has declined from a surplus position before the recession to a deficit of around 4 per cent of GDP.
This sizable current account deficit is projected to diminish gradually over the forecast horizon owing to modest improvements in the real trade balance and the terms of trade.
Given the above projection for real GDP, the Canadian economy is expected to reach full capacity in the second half of 2014, later than anticipated in the October Report.
Core CPI inflation moderated to an average of 1.3 per cent in October and November from an average of 1.5 per cent in the third quarter and 2.0 per cent in the first half of 2012.
Alternative measures of core inflation have also trended down.
The decline in core CPI inflation has been larger than anticipated and reflects softer prices across a wide range of goods and services, consistent with the unexpected increase in excess capacity in the Canadian economy, as well as heightened competitive pressures among retailers.
The greater-than-expected softness in core inflation has also reflected a number of idiosyncratic developments.
Reported auto prices have been weaker in recent months than the typical seasonal pattern would suggest, reflecting in part a methodological change implemented by Statistics Canada.
In addition, increases in regulated prices (such as auto insurance) have slowed more significantly than anticipated.
The declines in inflation in food and clothing prices in response to the waning effects of prior increases in agricultural prices have also been larger than projected.
Total CPI inflation has also continued to ease in recent months, in contrast to the Bank's expectations in the October Report.
This easing is due to softer core inflation, as well as weaker-than-expected gasoline prices, which in turn reflect both lower world prices for crude oil and lower margins.
As reported in the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey, almost all firms surveyed continue to expect average inflation over the next two years to remain within the 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range.
The January Consensus Economics forecasts for total CPI inflation were 1.8 per cent in 2013 and 2.0 per cent in 2014.
Core inflation is expected to remain subdued in coming quarters before rising gradually to reach 2 per cent in the second half of 2014, as economic slack is gradually absorbed and inflation expectations remain well anchored.
In addition, growth in labour compensation is expected to stay moderate, consistent with recent trends in wage growth.
This projection for core inflation is weaker than in the October Report, owing to greater-than-anticipated excess supply in the Canadian economy over most of the projection horizon, as well as the expected persistence of recent relative price shocks in coming quarters.
Total CPI inflation is projected to remain around 1 per cent over the near term.
With the profile for core inflation weaker and futures prices suggesting similar oil prices to those assumed at the time of the October Report, the Bank now expects total CPI inflation to stay well below the 2 per cent target over most of the coming year before returning to target in the second half of 2014.
Chart 38 and Chart 39 depict the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the first quarter of 2013 to the end of 2014.
While global tail risks have diminished as a result of a series of actions by European and American authorities, the inflation outlook in Canada is still subject to significant risks.
The three main upside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the possibility of stronger-than-expected growth in the US economy, higher Canadian exports and renewed momentum in Canadian residential investment.
Private sector demand in the United States could be stronger than expected if the negative effects of policy uncertainty dissipate more rapidly or if household spending grows faster, given improvements in the housing market and the degree of deleveraging that has already taken place.
Growth in Canadian exports could be stronger than expected if exporters improve their competitiveness more rapidly than currently assumed or if global growth is stronger than projected.
The unexpected contraction in exports in the second half of 2012 could also give way to a sharper rebound in 2013.
While residential investment in Canada has declined as expected after reaching record-high levels, it could regain momentum, adding to domestic demand for a time but reinforcing existing imbalances.
The three main downside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the European crisis, more protracted weakness in business investment and exports in Canada, and the possibility that growth in Canadian household spending could be weaker.
Although immediate risks have diminished, the policy challenges facing Europe remain considerable and a failure to contain the crisis remains the most serious risk facing the global and Canadian economies.
The projected pickup in Canadian economic growth in 2013 relies heavily on an improvement in business investment and net exports.
There is a risk that the recent poor performance could be extended longer than expected, particularly if external demand is weaker or if commodity prices are less supportive.
Global economic growth has evolved broadly as anticipated in the January Monetary Policy Report.
In the United States, the expansion is continuing at a modest pace, with gradually strengthening private demand partly offset by accelerated fiscal consolidation.
Significant policy easing has been introduced in Japan.
After picking up sharply in the second half of 2012, growth in China has eased.
Commodity prices received by Canadian producers remain elevated by historical standards and, overall, they are little changed since the last Report.
Global economic activity is expected to grow modestly in 2013, at a rate of 3.0 per cent, before strengthening to 3.6 per cent in 2014 and 3.8 per cent in 2015.
The Bank's base-case projection is predicated on the assumption that the crisis in the euro area will continue to be contained.
In response to significant excess capacity and declining inflationary pressures, central banks in some advanced economies have provided additional, substantial unconventional monetary easing while keeping policy interest rates at historically low levels.
These actions have helped to anchor medium-term inflation expectations and support stimulative global financial conditions.
Global financial conditions have generally eased since the last Report as market participants have become more confident about the resilience of the global recovery.
In particular, global tail risks associated with near-term US fiscal policy have diminished.
Markets are showing increased signs of differentiating among individual countries and financial assets, as demonstrated by the recent decline in co-movements in asset prices.
Monetary policy, combined with signs of strengthening private demand, has supported market confidence.
While yields on long-term government bonds remain low, equity prices have reached record-high levels.
Corporate credit markets continue to be robust, and yields have stabilized near recent record lows.
Financial conditions in Japan have improved further since the last Report, reflecting the unexpectedly bold monetary stimulus measures that were announced recently.
Japanese equity prices have substantially outperformed all major equity market indexes since January, and the Nikkei index has reached its highest level since the summer of 2008.
Government bond yields have fallen despite higher inflation expectations, and there has been a marked depreciation of the yen.
In the euro area, there has been a deterioration in market sentiment stemming from a number of factors, including weakening economic conditions, political uncertainty in Italy, the unsettling aspects of the financial assistance program in Cyprus and difficulties in implementing required fiscal austerity measures in Portugal.
Consequently, unlike other advanced economies, equity indexes in the euro area, especially bank sub-indexes, have fallen.
Although funding conditions for Italy have deteriorated somewhat, owing to increased investor caution, there has been some differentiation among peripheral sovereigns.
For example, yields on Irish bonds have fallen, reflecting progress toward fiscal adjustment and the implementation of structural reforms.
Strengthening private domestic demand and a gradual firming in external conditions are expected to underpin the US economic expansion, while fiscal consolidation and, to a diminishing extent, household deleveraging will continue to weigh on growth.
US real GDP rose marginally in the fourth quarter of 2012, as solid underlying private demand was largely offset by outsized declines in some volatile components of spending.
Real GDP growth is estimated to have rebounded in the first quarter, boosted by higher growth in consumption, although the second quarter is projected to be weaker as fiscal drag intensifies.
On a quarterly basis, economic growth is then expected to pick up to around 3.5 per cent by early 2014, before moderating over the balance of the projection horizon.
On an annual average basis, growth in US real GDP is expected to be 2.0 per cent in 2013, 3.1 per cent in 2014 and 3.3 per cent in 2015.
Ongoing public sector deleveraging remains the strongest headwind facing the US economy.
The drag on US real GDP growth from fiscal consolidation is expected to rise from 1.0 percentage point in 2012 to 1.8 percentage points in 2013, before declining to 0.8 percentage points in 2014.
As a result, the drag from fiscal policy is now more front-loaded than expected in the Bank's January projection, although the cumulative effect over the 2013-14 period has been revised down.
In light of the constraining effects of fiscal consolidation and private deleveraging, monetary policy is projected to remain highly stimulative through 2015.
Consistent with guidance provided by the Federal Open Market Committee, the federal funds rate is expected to stay at exceptionally low levels, for at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6.5 per cent, projected inflation one and two years out is no more than 2.5 per cent, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored.
To provide further policy accommodation, the Federal Reserve is also expected to continue to purchase agency mortgage-backed securities and longer-term US Treasuries.
Consumer spending has been solid since the beginning of 2013, although it is being affected by the 2 per cent rise in payroll taxes that took effect in January.
Consumption is projected to be supported by rising labour income, low debt-financing costs and better access to credit.
In addition, the drag from household deleveraging is expected to diminish over the projection horizon, given the considerable progress households have made in repairing their balance sheets.
The recovery in the housing market continues to gain traction.
Importantly, house prices have started to increase after five years of declines.
Residential construction should continue to grow at a solid pace, underpinned by gradually improving labour market conditions, underlying demographic demand, low mortgage interest rates and an expected improvement in access to credit.
Fundamentals for business fixed investment remain quite favourable.
US corporations have strong balance sheets and can obtain market financing at a very low cost.
Following some volatility at the turn of the year caused by uncertainty related to the impending fiscal cliff, business investment is now anticipated to grow at a robust pace.
Non-residential construction is also expected to recover, reflecting buoyant investment activity in the US oil and gas sector as well as a gradual improvement in the commercial real estate sector.
Firming foreign demand is projected to support a steady rise in US exports through 2015, while stronger domestic demand should stimulate the growth of imports.
Oil imports, however, especially of light crude, are expected to be increasingly displaced by growing US production.
US inflationary pressures remain weak.
The price index for core personal consumption expenditures has risen at an annual rate of only 1.1 per cent over the past three months, although medium-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored.
A modest rise in US inflation is anticipated over the projection horizon, however, as the excess supply gap is gradually reduced.
Real GDP in the euro area decreased at an annual rate of 2.3 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2012, the largest drop since the 2008-09 recession.
Germany's real GDP declined by 2.4 per cent owing to weak investment and exports, particularly exports to the United States.
As well, activity in many peripheral economies continued to contract, dampened by the negative effects of fiscal austerity, low confidence and tight credit conditions.
The transmission of monetary policy to the peripheral countries remains impaired, with market segmentation leading to persistently high bank lending rates, especially for small and medium-sized corporations.
Economic activity in the euro area is expected to decline further during the first half of 2013, although at a slower pace.
Domestic demand is not expected to become a significant driver of economic growth until late 2014, when the negative effects of tight lending conditions and fiscal consolidation begin to dissipate.
On an average annual basis, real GDP in the euro area is expected to decline by 0.6 per cent in 2013, before rising by 0.8 per cent in 2014 and 1.4 per cent in 2015.
Significant differences in the economic conditions of the core and peripheral economies are expected to persist.
Headline CPI inflation in the euro area has eased in recent months, falling to 1.7 per cent on a year-over-year basis in March.
The decline occurred despite the impact of increases in indirect taxes, which is estimated to have added up to 0.4 percentage points.
Given the large excess supply gap, inflation is expected to decline further over the projection horizon.
Although the crisis in the euro area remains contained, the financial crisis in Cyprus and political uncertainty in Italy highlight ongoing vulnerabilities.
To move the euro area onto a more sustainable growth trajectory, structural reforms to enhance competitiveness and further progress toward a banking union, as well as fiscal integration, will be needed.
Real GDP in Japan grew by 0.2 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2012, following two consecutive quarterly declines.
Long-standing weakness and deflationary pressures have prompted the Japanese authorities to undertake more significant policy measures, including additional fiscal stimulus.
Most importantly, the Bank of Japan has moved to a 2 per cent inflation target and has recently announced a number of bold new measures designed to achieve this goal within two years - almost doubling the monetary base to 270 trillion (or 54 per cent of GDP) by the end of 2014, primarily through the purchase of longer-term Japanese government bonds.
The recent sharp depreciation of the yen, coupled with an increase in external demand, is also expected to spur a significant rebound in exports.
However, planned increases in the value-added tax in 2014 and 2015 may dampen growth somewhat.
Prospects for economic growth in Japan have been revised upward since the January Report, as the positive effect of more accommodative monetary policy more than offsets the negative influence of a downward revision to the Bank's view on Japan's potential output growth.
Real GDP growth in China slowed in the first quarter, following a pickup to very strong growth rates in the second half of 2012.
Ongoing momentum in the residential real estate sector and renewed increases in home prices have raised concerns about imbalances in the sector, prompting Chinese policy-makers to introduce additional measures to limit housing demand.
China's real GDP growth is expected to stabilize in a range between 7.5 per cent and 8 per cent over the next three years, reflecting policy actions taken to dampen the buildup of domestic imbalances.
Growth in investment spending is projected to slow gradually, as public infrastructure investment moderates and the housing sector stabilizes in response to the new, more restrictive policy measures.
In contrast, the growth of consumer spending is expected to gain momentum, fuelled by solid increases in wages and employment, as well as ongoing structural reforms.
A rebound in exports is also anticipated, consistent with improving demand in advanced economies, but will likely be tempered by a projected appreciation in the real value of the renminbi.
While the improvement has been most pronounced in emerging Asia and parts of Latin America, there are sizable differences in economic conditions across and within regions.
Growth in Mexico continues to be relatively strong, and economic growth in Brazil has firmed, although it remains below potential.
An exception in emerging Asia has been India, where growth has slowed because of reductions in government spending, a disappointing summer harvest and ongoing supply-side constraints.
Overall, economic activity in EMEs is projected to strengthen over the projection horizon, supported by continued policy stimulus and increasing external demand.
Commodity prices remain high by historical standards.
Modest global demand and increased supply, however, have led to a 14 per cent decline in the Bank of Canada's commodity price index from its most recent peak in April 2011.
The BCPI is little changed since the January Report, as higher prices for Western Canada Select crude oil, natural gas and lumber have been offset by declines in other components.
The Bank's crude oil price index is up about 7 per cent since the January Report, supported by the recovery in the price of WCS, which has jumped to US$80 per barrel from a recent low of US$55 per barrel in December.
However, other benchmark prices for oil, such as Brent and West Texas Intermediate , have decreased.
The rebound in the price for WCS is related to both increased use of rail transportation and a temporary reduction in production, which have eased constraints caused by insufficient pipeline capacity.
As a result, the spread between WTI and WCS prices has returned closer to its historical norm of about US$15 per barrel.
Based on the latest futures curves, Brent and WTI prices are expected to decline slightly over the projection horizon, and the spread between these benchmark prices is anticipated to narrow modestly.
The gap between WTI and WCS prices is expected to widen somewhat, in response to an increase in Canadian production.
Natural gas prices have continued to rise in recent months, increasing by about 20 per cent since the January Report.
According to the latest futures curve, natural gas prices are expected to increase steadily, reaching US$4.50 per million BTU by the end of 2015.
Prices for non-energy commodities have fallen by about 4 per cent since the last Report.
Base metals prices have been on a declining trend since 2011, in line with slowing global economic growth, notably in China.
Slower growth in demand, combined with increased supply, has led to a marked buildup of inventories.
As a result, base metals prices are expected to remain weak over the near term, before firming modestly with the projected strengthening in global activity.
Lumber prices are expected to continue rising in coming years, albeit at a more modest pace, since the impact of increased demand for lumber from the US housing sector will be partly offset by expanding supply.
Prices for agricultural products are somewhat lower than in January and are expected to decrease further over the projection horizon, as crop yields rebound from drought-reduced levels.
Demand for Canada's non-commodity exports remains well below its pre-recession peak.
The foreign activity measure has regained only 70 per cent of the decline registered during the 2008-09 recession, largely reflecting the still-low level of activity in the US housing sector.
Notably, growing production of light crude oil in the United States is not expected to have a significant impact on Canadian exports of heavy crude.
Commodity prices, which, in aggregate, are still at historically high levels, should continue to support Canada's terms of trade and gross domestic income.
The Canadian dollar has averaged 98 cents US since the March fixed announcement date, compared with the 101 cents US assumed in January.
It is assumed to remain at 98 cents US over the projection horizon.
Following a weak second half of 2012, economic growth in Canada is projected to regain some momentum through 2013 as net exports pick up and business fixed investment returns to more solid growth.
Consumer spending is expected to grow at a moderate pace over the projection horizon, while residential investment declines further from historically high levels.
Growth in total household credit has slowed and the Bank continues to expect that the household debt-to-income ratio will stabilize near current levels.
Despite the projected recovery in exports, they are likely to remain below their pre-recession peak until the second half of 2014, owing to restrained foreign demand and ongoing competitiveness challenges, including the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar.
The outlook for the Canadian economy is slightly weaker than forecast in the January Report, with government spending now assumed to make an even smaller contribution to real GDP growth.
As a result, the Bank now sees the Canadian economy returning to full capacity only in mid-2015.
Total and core CPI inflation have remained low in recent months, broadly in line with expectations in the January Report, although there has been considerable monthly volatility.
Both inflation measures are projected to remain well below 2 per cent in coming quarters, reflecting the material slack in the economy, heightened competitive pressures in the retail sector, and some special factors such as slower increases in regulated prices and the pass-through of previous declines in agricultural prices to consumer prices.
As the economy returns to full capacity, and with inflation expectations well anchored, inflation is projected to rise gradually to the 2 per cent target by mid-2015.
Reflecting in part the considerable monetary policy accommodation in place, the supply and price of credit for businesses and households in Canada remain very stimulative, continuing to provide important support to the economic expansion.
Canadian debt markets have generally remained strong in recent months.
Yields on corporate bonds have edged down from their already exceptionally low levels, reflecting both a decline in yields on Canadian government bonds and a further narrowing in credit spreads.
Canadian equity markets, however, have underperformed equity markets in some other advanced economies since the January Report.
Additional evidence that credit conditions for Canadian firms continue to be very stimulative is provided by the responses of firms surveyed in the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey and those of financial institutions surveyed in the latest Senior Loan Officer Survey.
Responses to these surveys indicate that, on balance, borrowing conditions are little changed since last autumn, following a period of almost uninterrupted easing since late 2009.
Nonetheless, some tightening has been reported for smaller firms in the resource sector.
The favourable lending conditions offered to Canadian firms by financial institutions partly reflect the ongoing access by Canadian banks to low-cost funding across the term structure in both Canadian and foreign currencies.
The growth of total business credit has remained well above its historical average, stimulated by the highly advantageous financing conditions.
Some moderation has been seen in recent months, however, partly reflecting the unwinding of transitory factors.
In particular, bond issuance by non-financial corporations has slowed following rapid growth in the fourth quarter of 2012, which was boosted by the early refinancing of corporate debt at favourable interest rate levels, according to industry consultations.
In spite of the recent slowing, total business credit is still growing considerably faster than business investment.
As expected, growth in total household credit has continued to moderate despite near-record-low borrowing rates.
The cumulative effects of changes to mortgage insurance rules and the tightening of mortgage underwriting guidelines, an increasing appreciation among consumers of the risks associated with elevated debt levels, and the tightening bias of the Bank of Canada have all contributed to this moderation.
With household credit growth slowing to a pace close to that of disposable income in the fourth quarter, the aggregate household debt-to-income ratio remained roughly unchanged from the previous quarter at 165 per cent.
The Bank continues to anticipate that the debt-to-income ratio will stabilize near current levels.
Growth in the narrow monetary aggregates has picked up noticeably since the beginning of the year, coincident with other indicators that suggest a firming in GDP growth.
Growth in the broad monetary aggregates has also increased over the same period, largely owing to the contribution from narrow money.
Nonetheless, the overall trend in broad money remains consistent with subdued inflationary pressures ahead.
Output-related indicators suggest that a material degree of slack has re-emerged in the Canadian economy, as real GDP expanded at a rate below that of the economy's production potential throughout 2012.
Real GDP grew by 0.6 per cent (at annual rates) in the fourth quarter, with solid advances across most domestic components of GDP offset by an unexpectedly large reduction in inventory investment.
The Bank estimates that real GDP growth picked up to 1.5 per cent in the first quarter of 2013, driven primarily by a stabilization in inventory investment as well as higher exports, which in turn were supported by improved global demand and the passing of the temporary factors that restrained activity in the energy sector through the second half of 2012.
These rates of growth in output are slightly weaker than had been anticipated in the January Report, leaving the level of real GDP in the first quarter of 2013 0.3 per cent below the level expected at that time.
Consistent with these dynamics, the Bank's conventional measure of the output gap widened slightly to -1.2 per cent in the first quarter of 2013.
On balance, responses to the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey also indicate a material degree of slack in the Canadian economy.
The proportion of firms that would have difficulty meeting an unexpected increase in demand remains below the level seen over much of the past two years and below its historical average.
The proportion of firms reporting labour shortages declined further in the latest survey, remaining below the survey average.
Labour market indicators more generally continue to suggest the persistence of slack, although to varying degrees.
While the monthly employment data have been volatile, the unemployment rate declined to an average of 7.1 per cent in the first quarter, the lowest rate since the end of 2008.
However, the average duration of unemployment and the proportion of involuntary part-time workers remain at elevated levels.
In addition, wage growth has moderated in recent quarters.
On balance, the Bank judges that the economy was operating about 1 1/4 per cent below its production capacity in the first quarter of 2013, a slightly larger degree of slack than expected in the January Report.
The Bank continues to forecast a pickup in real GDP growth through 2013 and some rebalancing of aggregate demand in Canada.
With external demand projected to grow solidly and some of the challenges in the resource sector expected to be addressed over time, the contributions to growth from net exports and business fixed investment are forecast to increase.
Growth in household spending is projected to be relatively modest, reflecting continued moderate increases in consumption and further declines in residential investment.
The contribution of government spending to GDP is expected to remain at levels well below its historical average.
On a quarterly basis, economic growth in Canada is expected to rise from the 1.5 per cent estimated for the first quarter of 2013 to 2.5 per cent in the second half of 2013 and 3.0 per cent in the first half of 2014.
Despite this expected pickup, the weak output growth through the second half of 2012 causes real GDP growth on an annual average basis to dip to 1.5 per cent in 2013 from 1.8 per cent in 2012.
The level of economic activity over the projection horizon is somewhat lower than in the January Report.
This reflects downward revisions to growth in government spending, in line with the latest budget announcements from all levels of government.
It also reflects a slightly lower profile for business fixed investment, owing to firms' heightened concerns regarding the strength of demand as well as volatility in the prices received by Canadian oil producers.
Household spending has evolved broadly as expected in recent quarters.
Consumption has risen at about the same pace as disposable income, holding the savings rate roughly stable at slightly below 4 per cent and continuing to restrain the need for consumer credit.
Housing starts dropped markedly in the first quarter to an average of about 177,000 units, after remaining above demographic demand (estimated at roughly 185,000 units) over the past two years.
Despite the recent moderation in the rate of new housing construction, there are still signs of overbuilding, particularly of multiple-unit dwellings in some urban areas.
The resale housing market has shown some signs of stabilization in recent months, following the easing in both activity and prices from the high levels reached between the latter part of 2011 and early 2012.
Still, valuations in some segments of the housing market remain stretched.
As in the January Report, the outlook for household spending reflects some ongoing restraint by Canadian households related to high levels of debt.
Consumption is still expected to grow at a moderate rate over the projection horizon, in line with the growth of disposable income.
Residential investment is anticipated to decline further as overbuilding begins to be addressed, contributing to a more sustainable path for the housing sector.
In this regard, the share of residential investment in the overall economy is projected to decline toward its historical average .
The Bank expects growth in business fixed investment to return to a more solid pace through 2013 after slowing through the second half of 2012.
This slowdown, which was concentrated in the resource sector, appears to have reflected both sector-specific challenges and more general concerns about the outlook for global and domestic demand.
The projection for more solid investment growth continues to be supported by the healthy aggregate financial position of Canadian firms, favourable credit conditions and the strong Canadian dollar, as well as the impetus to improve productivity amid heightened pressures to become more competitive.
However, there are signs that the factors that have recently been weighing on investment growth are likely to persist for some time.
Responses to the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey point to moderate growth in business fixed investment over the near term, with many firms reporting that uncertainty regarding economic developments is influencing their investment plans and decisions, most frequently leading them to postpone projects.
Statistics Canada's latest annual survey of private and public investment also implies only a gradual rise in business investment growth in the quarters ahead, with the average annual nominal rate of growth in 2013 projected to be down from 2012, notably in the resource sector.
Against this backdrop, the Bank now forecasts a more subdued pickup in the growth rate of business fixed investment than was anticipated in the January Report.
Government spending is expected to contribute only very marginally to real GDP growth over the projection horizon.
While this contribution is considerably weaker than has been typical historically, it is in line with the plans of federal, provincial and local governments to consolidate spending.
The Bank expects net exports to provide a rising, although still relatively modest, contribution to GDP growth over the next two years.
Available indicators suggest a continued pickup in exports in early 2013 following a sharp contraction in the third quarter of 2012, which resulted in part from temporary disruptions in the energy sector.
However, the growth of exports continues to be restrained by ongoing competitiveness challenges, including the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar, which is being influenced by safe-haven flows and spillovers from global monetary policy.
These challenges, coupled with the still-weak level of foreign demand, suggest that Canada's exports will not regain their pre-recession peak until the second half of 2014.
Relative to the January Report, net exports have been revised up somewhat in 2014, reflecting the slightly higher level of foreign demand relative to domestic demand.
With modest improvements in the real trade balance, Canada's sizable current account deficit, which is currently around 4 per cent of GDP, is projected to narrow gradually over the forecast horizon.
Given the above projection for real GDP, the Canadian economy is expected to reach full capacity in mid-2015, later than anticipated in the January Report.
Total and core CPI inflation have remained low in recent months, broadly in line with expectations in the January Report.
There has been considerable monthly volatility, however, largely related to movements in auto prices.
The low level of core inflation, at an average of 1.2 per cent in January and February, reflects muted price pressures across a wide range of goods and services.
This is consistent with the material excess capacity in the economy as well as heightened competitive pressures on retailers from both domestic and foreign sources.
The continued expansion of big-box stores in Canada and the arrival of large US retailers have been factors, as has the rise in online shopping.
There has also been an increase in cross-border shopping, stimulated by the persistent strength in the Canadian dollar and the rise in travellers' duty-free exemptions for short stays implemented in June 2012.
In addition, a number of special factors have put downward pressure on core inflation in recent quarters, including slower increases in regulated prices (such as auto insurance) and the relatively large impact of past declines in the world prices of agricultural commodities on food and clothing prices in Canada.
Total CPI inflation, which averaged 0.9 per cent in January and February, has been restrained by low core inflation as well as by declining mortgage interest costs, although this has been offset in part by higher prices for gasoline in recent months.
As reported in the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey, 93 per cent of firms surveyed expect average inflation over the next two years to remain within the 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range.
A majority of firms now expect inflation to be in the lower half of that range, consistent with the Bank's inflation projection.
The April Consensus Economics forecasts for total CPI inflation were 1.4 per cent in 2013 and 1.8 per cent in 2014.
Core inflation is expected to remain subdued in coming quarters before rising gradually to 2 per cent by mid-2015, as the economy returns to full capacity, the special factors that are weighing on core inflation subside, and inflation expectations remain well anchored.
In addition, while wage growth has been relatively subdued recently, partly because of ongoing public sector wage restraints, productivity growth has been weak.
As a result, growth in unit labour costs has risen in recent quarters, which is expected to contribute to the anticipated gradual rise in core inflation.
The projection for core inflation is slightly lower than in the January Report owing to the greater-than-anticipated slack in the Canadian economy over most of the projection horizon.
Total CPI inflation is projected to remain near 1 per cent through a large part of 2013, owing to low core inflation as well as the dampening impact of lower mortgage interest costs.
Thereafter, total CPI inflation is expected to return gradually to target by mid-2015.
The profile for total inflation is somewhat lower than in the January Report, mainly because of more subdued core inflation.
Chart 37 and Chart 38 depict the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the second quarter of 2013 to the end of 2015.
The inflation outlook in Canada is subject to upside and downside risks, which are similar to those identified in the January Report.
The three main upside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the possibility of stronger-than-expected growth in the US and global economies, a sharper-than-expected rebound in Canadian exports, and renewed momentum in Canadian residential investment.
In addition, the extraordinary monetary policy measures recently adopted by a number of countries could have a larger-than-anticipated effect on global demand and commodity prices.
Growth in Canadian exports could be stronger than expected if exporters improve their competitiveness more rapidly than currently assumed.
The unexpected weakness in exports in the second half of 2012 could also give way to a sharper rebound in 2013.
Even if the crisis stays contained, there is a risk that the weakness in Europe could be more protracted and that uncertainty could remain elevated for longer than presently projected.
The projected pickup in Canadian economic growth through 2013 relies heavily on an improvement in business investment and net exports.
Global economic growth remains modest, although the pace of economic activity varies significantly across the major economies.
The US economic expansion is proceeding at a moderate pace, with the continued strengthening in private demand being partly offset by the impact of fiscal consolidation.
While stronger than in the advanced economies, real GDP growth in China and other emerging-market economies has slowed, exerting downward pressure on global commodity prices.
Global financial conditions remain very supportive, despite an increase in bond yields and a more recent pullback from some risky assets.
Considerable monetary policy stimulus remains in place in the United States and other advanced economies in response to continuing large excess supply gaps and persistent disinflationary pressures.
The global economy is expected to grow at a rate of 2.8 per cent in 2013, before picking up to 3.5 per cent in 2014 and 3.7 per cent in 2015.
The Bank's projection is somewhat weaker than in the April Monetary Policy Report, owing primarily to a downward revision to real GDP growth in China and other emerging-market economies.
Global financial conditions continue to be very supportive.
Although yields on most government bonds have risen sharply in recent months, they are still quite low by historical standards.
As the global recovery, led by the United States, proceeds and downside risks recede, a normalization of interest rates will be both necessary and desirable.
As this process unfolds, some short-term volatility and temporary overshooting are to be expected.
Yields on higher-rated US corporate bonds have moved up in tandem with government bond yields, but remain close to historical lows.
Some other US assets, including real estate investment trusts, high-yield corporate debt and municipal bonds, have registered larger declines in prices.
Yield spreads on euro-area peripheral sovereign bonds have also widened in recent weeks.
Equity prices are at historically high levels in many advanced economies.
Shifts in investor confidence regarding the implementation by the Japanese authorities of a three-pronged reform program have contributed to recent volatility in the Nikkei.
Nevertheless, the index is still around 60 per cent higher than in November 2012, when expectations of aggressive stimulus policies first took hold.
Emerging-market economies have experienced increased capital outflows in response to weakening domestic growth prospects and higher interest rates in advanced economies.
As a result, bond yields in emerging markets have risen, equity prices have fallen and currencies have depreciated, despite interventions by many central banks.
The US economic expansion is projected to become more firmly entrenched as the effects of fiscal consolidation and household deleveraging gradually dissipate.
Highly accommodative monetary policy continues to play a key role in supporting the recovery.
Growth in US real GDP picked up to 1.8 per cent in the first quarter, underpinned by a moderate increase in consumer spending and continued robust momentum in residential construction.
Economic growth is estimated to have remained modest in the second quarter, but is expected to strengthen gradually through to mid-2014 and stabilize around 3 1/4 per cent thereafter.
Fiscal consolidation continues to weigh heavily on US GDP growth.
As noted in the Bank's April Report, fiscal drag is expected to be 1.8 percentage points in 2013, 0.8 percentage points in 2014 and zero in 2015.
The US Federal Reserve has indicated that it may slow the pace of asset purchases later this year and end purchases around mid-year 2014, provided that the outlook for economic activity and the labour market improves, as it anticipates.
However, since the unemployment rate is expected to remain elevated and inflation pressures subdued, most members of the Federal Open Market Committee do not expect the first increase in the policy interest rate to occur until 2015.
Growth in consumer spending is estimated to have been modest in the second quarter of 2013 as households adjusted to previously enacted tax increases.
Thereafter, consumption is projected to grow at a more solid pace, supported by further gains in employment and wages, easier access to credit, improving confidence, and the significant boost to household net worth from higher equity and house prices.
Housing activity has been expanding at a rapid pace for several quarters, albeit from extremely low levels, and should continue to do so, supported by the same favourable fundamentals noted above and a rebound in household formation.
The positive feedback loop between the recovery in housing activity and consumption growth is expected to persist over the projection horizon.
Given this dynamic and the considerable degree of household deleveraging that has already taken place, there is a risk that consumption and housing activity could surprise on the upside.
If this were to occur, it would have a positive impact on business confidence and investment.
Excess capacity, together with uncertainty about future demand, has weighed on investment spending in recent quarters.
Growth in business investment is projected to rebound, however, as confidence recovers and overall demand conditions continue to improve.
The existing low cost of capital and strong financial position of corporations will provide further support.
Rapid growth in the US energy sector continues to drive spending on infrastructure, and the resultant lower energy prices will stimulate US economic activity.
Exports are projected to make an increasing contribution to US economic growth, buoyed by a firming in foreign demand.
Non-oil imports are also expected to rise in line with stronger domestic demand, while overseas oil imports will continue to be displaced by growing domestic production.
Ongoing excess supply in labour and product markets is putting downward pressure on US inflation.
Year-over-year growth in the price index for core personal consumption expenditures has slowed to 1.1 per cent in recent months, a record low.
Over the projection horizon, US inflation is expected to rise toward the 2 per cent inflation target as excess supply gradually diminishes.
In the euro area, real GDP fell by 1.1 per cent in the first quarter of 2013, owing largely to weak investment.
Growth turned slightly positive in Germany but was negative in most other countries, owing to fiscal austerity, tight credit conditions, extremely high unemployment and low confidence.
In light of the persistent weakness in economic conditions and subdued inflation, the European Central Bank reduced its policy rate by 25 basis points in May and later provided guidance that it would keep the rate low for an extended period.
Financial fragmentation continues to impair the transmission of monetary policy, however, as reflected in the divergence between lending rates in the peripheral and core economies.
The level of economic activity in the euro area is expected to stabilize this year, with a gradual recovery unfolding in 2014.
In 2015, growth is anticipated to pick up somewhat, reflecting reduced drag from fiscal consolidation and some improvement in credit conditions.
The Bank's projection assumes that the crisis in the euro area will continue to be contained.
However, a sustained recovery will require further progress on bank deleveraging, structural and fiscal reforms, deeper economic integration, and timely completion of the banking union.
A possible reintensification of the euro-area crisis therefore remains a significant downside risk to the Bank's projection.
Japanese authorities are implementing an ambitious policy and reform program to boost the country's growth prospects and end deflation.
This program is often referred to as the "Three Arrows" and consists of: the adoption of a 2 per cent inflation target by the Bank of Japan and unprecedented quantitative monetary easing to achieve this goal within approximately two years; substantial fiscal stimulus in the near term, followed by fiscal consolidation starting in mid-2014; and structural reforms to promote long-term growth.
Equity prices are significantly higher than in November, real longer-term interest rates on Japanese government bonds have fallen below zero, the yen has depreciated by more than 20 per cent against the US dollar and confidence has increased sharply.
These developments have contributed to a rapid recovery in economic activity, with real GDP growth strengthening to 4.1 per cent in the first quarter of 2013.
Economic growth in Japan is projected to remain robust over the remainder of 2013, averaging around 3 per cent, and to moderate thereafter in the context of increases in the value-added tax.
However, the recent volatility in financial conditions highlights the challenges faced by the Japanese authorities in implementing their "Three Arrows" agenda.
Authorities have made it clear that, in addition to monetary policy, ambitious structural and fiscal reforms are essential for addressing issues related to Japan's aging population and elevated public debt levels.
Real GDP growth in China slowed to 7.5 per cent in the second quarter of 2013 on a year-over-year basis.
The ongoing deceleration in China's economy has largely reflected weaker foreign demand and a moderation in the growth of investment spending.
In addition, the authorities have recently introduced new measures to restrain both credit growth and activities in the shadow banking sector.
These measures have contributed to the recent stress in China's interbank market.
Growth in China's real GDP is projected to ease further, to 7 1/4 per cent, through to the end of 2014, as weaker growth in public infrastructure investment, excess capacity in some heavy industries and measures designed to reduce credit growth lead to a further slowing in the pace of investment.
A gradual strengthening in consumption, sustained by solid labour market conditions and "consumption-friendly" structural reforms, should allow the growth of economic activity to stabilize at around 7 1/2 per cent through 2015.
Net exports contribute only slightly to GDP growth over the projection period, restrained by the continued appreciation of the real effective exchange rate for the renminbi.
Compared with the April Report, real GDP growth has been revised down through 2015, reflecting tighter financial conditions.
Efforts to rein in credit growth, existing imbalances in the Chinese economy and challenges associated with shifting to consumption led growth represent significant downside risks to the projection.
Moreover, with economic growth moderating, EMEs are particularly vulnerable to global financial turbulence.
Indeed, credit conditions have tightened following outflows of capital caused by reduced prospects for domestic growth and higher interest rates in advanced economies.
Apart from a few central banks, monetary authorities in a number of EMEs have lowered their policy interest rates and allowed some exchange rate depreciation, in response to the slower pace of economic growth.
Macroeconomic stimulus measures, strengthening external demand and structural reforms (particularly those aimed at reducing supply bottlenecks) are expected to support a pickup in growth over the projection horizon.
Slowing demand in China and other EMEs, combined with some retreat from risky assets, has exerted downward pressure on many commodity prices in recent months, especially base metals prices.
Global oil prices, as measured by the Brent benchmark, are up somewhat relative to the April Report, in response to heightened geopolitical concerns.
Oil prices in North America have increased significantly, however, benefiting from improved transportation capacity and a rise in seasonal demand that have helped to reduce inventories in the US Midwest.
As a result, the spread between the prices for Brent and West Texas Intermediate crude oil has narrowed to approximately US$3, the lowest level in more than two years.
The gap between WTI and Western Canada Select has returned to a more normal level of roughly US$15, down from an average of US$35 in January.
Natural gas prices continue to be driven by weather-related factors and have fallen by about 14 per cent.
The latest futures curves suggest that crude oil prices will decline by roughly 11 per cent through 2015, consistent with a rise in global production, modest growth in demand and an expected decline in the risk premium associated with tensions in the Middle East.
The spread between Brent and WTI prices is projected to widen slightly, and the gap between WTI and WCS prices is also anticipated to increase.
Natural gas prices in North America are expected to rise to around US$4.30 per million BTU by the end of 2015, reflecting increased demand for electricity generation.
Prices for non-energy commodities have fallen by 7 per cent since the last Report.
On balance, they are projected to remain unchanged through to mid-2014, before rising gradually thereafter, owing to improved global demand.
In response to a temporary slowdown in US residential construction, weaker Chinese demand and a strong increase in North American production, lumber prices have plunged by about 22 per cent, erasing the gains seen since last October.
Prices are expected to rise over the projection horizon, however, driven by the continued strength in US residential construction.
In contrast, base metals prices are expected to weaken in the near term, in response to slowing demand (especially from China), rising production and high inventories.
Prices for base metals are then expected to rise modestly starting in mid-2014, supported by a pickup in global demand.
The Bank's foreign activity measure, which captures the composition of foreign demand for Canadian non-commodity exports, has reversed only about 75 per cent of the decline registered during the 2008-09 recession, mostly reflecting the improving, but still low, level of activity in the US residential construction sector.
Over the projection horizon, however, the measure is expected to grow at a solid pace, averaging close to 5.5 per cent per year, supported by strong increases in US business and residential investment in a context of continued improvement in household and business confidence.
The foreign activity measure is projected to return to its pre-recession level in early 2014.
The Bank of Canada commodity price index has increased slightly since the April Report, owing to higher prices for crude oil.
The BCPI is expected to remain relatively stable through 2015, with the effects of declining oil prices offset by a gradual rise in the prices of non-energy commodities, including lumber and, eventually, base metals.
As a result, the projected profile for commodity prices is not expected to provide significant additional support to Canada's terms of trade over the projection horizon.
Oil prices nevertheless remain at historically elevated levels and should support Canadian business investment in the coming years.
The Canadian dollar has averaged approximately 96 cents US since the May fixed announcement date, compared with the 98 cents US assumed in April.
By convention, it is assumed to remain at its recent level of 96 cents US over the projection horizon.
The Bank expects the Canadian economy to grow at a moderate pace through 2015.
While growth will be choppy in the near term as a result of unusual temporary factors, underlying momentum in the economy is expected to build into 2014.
After picking up sharply in the first quarter of 2013, exports are projected to continue to recover, which should boost confidence and lead to increasingly solid growth in business fixed investment.
The economy will also be supported by continued growth in consumer spending, while further modest declines in residential investment are expected.
Growth in real GDP is projected to be sufficient to absorb the current material excess capacity in the economy around mid-2015, contributing to a gradual rise in total CPI and core inflation to 2 per cent between now and then.
While real GDP growth in the first quarter of 2013 was stronger than expected, the Bank foresees a somewhat more challenging external environment over the projection horizon than previously anticipated.
This reflects slightly reduced expectations for global economic growth, which contributes to a lower profile for commodity prices.
Financial conditions in Canada remain accommodative, underpinned by the considerable monetary policy stimulus currently in place.
Nevertheless, Canadian financial markets have experienced increased volatility since the April Report, reflecting developments in global markets.
As in other advanced economies, yields on Canadian government bonds have risen, reversing their decline from earlier in the year.
Yields on corporate bonds have also increased, as has the volatility in credit spreads.
Still, Canadian bond yields remain low by historical standards, owing in part to strong international demand for Canadian fixed-income securities.
Canadian equities have continued to underperform equities in most other advanced economies, largely reflecting the Canadian market's relatively high exposure to developments in commodity prices.
Despite the recent volatility in capital markets, overall credit conditions for Canadian firms remain favourable, which is reflected in the responses to the Bank's latest Business Outlook Survey and Senior Loan Officer Survey.
Both surveys suggest that, as of mid-June, credit conditions had remained broadly unchanged since last autumn, following a period of almost uninterrupted easing since late 2009.
Against this backdrop, the growth of total business credit has moderated through the first five months of 2013 to a rate close to its historical average.
This moderation follows very rapid growth in the latter part of 2012, which was boosted by the early refinancing of debt at low interest rates.
Firms' borrowing needs have remained relatively modest in recent quarters, given the weak growth of fixed investment and the relatively high cash positions of non-financial firms.
Borrowing costs for households remain very low, although some banks have recently announced increases in fixed-term mortgage rates in conjunction with the general rise in market interest rates.
Growth in total household credit has continued to slow since the April Report, to a rate considerably below its historical average, and the ratio of household debt to disposable income has edged lower.
The cumulative effects of changes to mortgage insurance rules and the tightening of mortgage underwriting guidelines, increasing consumer appreciation of the risks associated with elevated debt levels, and reminders about the eventual normalization of interest rates have all contributed to this downward trend.
Recent data revisions confirm the sustained household response to these influences over the past several quarters, with the debt-to-income ratio revised lower.
The Bank expects a flat-to-lower profile for the household debt-to-disposable-income ratio over the projection horizon.
Reflecting in part the passing of transitory factors, growth in the narrow monetary aggregates has slowed from its very rapid rate in the first quarter of the year.
Growth in the broad monetary aggregates has moderated as well, mainly reflecting the contribution from narrow money.
The overall trend in broad money remains consistent with the Bank's inflation projection.
There continues to be a material degree of slack in the Canadian economy.
As expected, real GDP growth accelerated in the first quarter of 2013, following weakness throughout 2012.
At 2.5 per cent (at annual rates), growth was stronger than estimated in the April Report, outpacing estimates of growth in the economy's production potential for the first time in six quarters.
The first-quarter expansion was driven by a large pickup in exports, which reflected strengthening private demand in the United States in recent quarters and the reversal of temporary disruptions that restrained activity in the energy and mining sectors in the second half of 2012.
At the same time, most major components of final domestic demand increased only modestly.
The stronger growth in the Canadian economy in the first quarter, coupled with some modest upward revisions over the 2008-12 period, resulted in a real GDP level in the first quarter that was 0.5 per cent higher than anticipated in the last Report.
As a result, the conventional measure of the output gap is now somewhat smaller than previously estimated, at 1.0 per cent in the first quarter, compared with 1.2 per cent in April.
Growth in real GDP is forecast to have slowed sharply in the second quarter, to around 1.0 per cent.
This slowing primarily reflects the immediate adverse impact on economic activity of the catastrophic floods in Alberta and the province-wide strike in the construction sector in Quebec in the latter part of June.
Since the lost activity is expected to be largely recovered in the third quarter, the Bank will look through the volatility induced by these temporary factors when assessing the degree of excess capacity in the Canadian economy.
On balance, labour market indicators point to a greater degree of slack than the conventional measure of the output gap.
The level of average hours worked continues to be significantly below its trend, while the proportion of involuntary part-time workers and the average duration of unemployment remain at elevated levels.
Wage increases have remained subdued, consistent with the observed softness in price inflation in the services sector.
Despite solid employment gains, the unemployment rate has continued to hover somewhat above 7 per cent.
Finally, the Bank's latest Business Outlook Survey finds little evidence of labour shortages.
By contrast, in the summer Business Outlook Survey, the proportion of firms expecting that they would have difficulty meeting an unexpected increase in demand has risen to around its historical average, suggesting limited slack in the economy.
This is consistent with weak growth in the capital stock in recent quarters, and with the survey findings that uncertainty continues to affect the investment decisions of many firms.
As business confidence improves in response to evidence of firming demand, physical capacity can be expected to expand at a more significant pace.
These investments will contribute to the reconstruction of the Canadian economy's production potential by supporting stronger growth in productivity and helping to alleviate capacity constraints in some sectors.
Taking into account the range of indicators of capacity pressures, as well as the temporary nature of the factors affecting activity in the near term, the Bank judges that the economy was operating roughly 1.25 per cent below its production capacity in the second quarter of 2013, a similar degree of slack to that expected in the April Report.
The Bank continues to forecast an improvement in the underlying momentum of the Canadian economy through mid-2014 as external demand increases and business confidence strengthens.
Nevertheless, the protracted nature of the recovery in US and global demand remains an important headwind to the Canadian economy, particularly in the current environment of greater restraint in domestic household and government spending.
Accordingly, as in the April Report, the profile for real GDP in Canada is projected to remain relatively subdued for this stage of the cycle .
As noted earlier, economic growth in Canada is expected to be choppy in the near term.
From an average rate of 2.4 per cent over the second and third quarters of 2013, growth is projected to rise gradually to 2.8 per cent in the second quarter of 2014.
Given this projection for real GDP, the Canadian economy is expected to reach full capacity around mid-2015, as in the April Report.
After picking up sharply in the first quarter, exports are projected to continue to increase at a solid pace.
The further recovery in US business and residential investment should particularly benefit those export sectors that have lagged thus far, notably machinery and equipment and lumber products.
The diversification of Canadian trade toward faster-growing economies should also help to improve Canada's export performance.
In spite of the expected solid growth ahead, the level of exports is not projected to return to its pre-recession peak until the second half of 2014.
This reflects not only the protracted nature of the global recovery, but also ongoing competitiveness challenges and capacity constraints in some sectors that limit the ability of Canadian exporters to respond quickly to increased foreign demand.
Following a strong recovery from the depressed levels experienced in the aftermath of the 2008-09 recession, the growth of business fixed investment has weakened in recent quarters, reflecting concerns regarding the strength of both domestic and foreign demand, as well as challenges specific to the resource sector.
As a result, growth in business fixed investment is likely to remain moderate over the near term, despite the healthy aggregate financial position of Canadian firms, favourable credit conditions and the strong Canadian dollar, as well as the impetus to improve productivity amid heightened pressures to become more competitive.
Over the projection horizon, growth in business fixed investment is expected to strengthen as the recovery in Canadian exports becomes more firmly entrenched, providing greater confidence about the prospects for global demand.
In the first quarter of 2013, household spending failed to contribute materially to real GDP growth for the first time since early 2009, since consumption rose only modestly and residential investment declined for the third consecutive quarter.
This extends a recent trend toward slower growth in household spending, which, combined with the downward revisions to the debt-to-income ratio and upward revisions to the savings rate, points to increased household prudence.
In the Bank's forecast, consumption increases at a moderate pace, slightly above the rate of growth of disposable income.
Nevertheless, the savings rate remains well above the average of the past decade - consistent with the persistence of a degree of household caution in the context of high debt levels.
Residential investment is projected to decline further from historically high levels, reflecting lower rates of new construction as previous overbuilding is addressed, thus contributing to a more sustainable path for the housing sector.
Recent increases in fixed-term mortgage rates will also provide a degree of restraint.
While the Bank expects household caution to remain a constraint on spending over the forecast horizon, it is possible that, in an environment where borrowing conditions are still highly favourable, household expenditures could gather renewed momentum.
The rebound in the housing market in recent months, which can be seen across the indicators for new construction, resale activity and house prices, reinforces this possibility - although some variation around the trend is to be expected amid a constructive evolution of household imbalances.
Government spending is expected to contribute only marginally to real GDP growth over the projection horizon.
While this contribution is considerably weaker than has been typical historically, it is in line with the announced plans of federal, provincial and local governments to consolidate spending.
Total CPI and core inflation have stayed low in recent months, and both are expected to remain subdued in the near term.
Low core inflation, averaging 1.1 per cent in April and May, continues to reflect persistent material excess capacity in the economy, heightened competitive pressures on retailers from both domestic and foreign sources, relatively subdued increases in wages amid slack labour market conditions, and a number of temporary sector-specific factors.
There remains some uncertainty regarding the importance of each of these factors in accounting for the low level of core inflation.
Total CPI inflation, which averaged 0.6 per cent in April and May, has been restrained not only by low core inflation, but also by declining mortgage interest costs.
Core inflation is expected to remain subdued in coming quarters.
As the economy gradually returns to full capacity and, with inflation expectations well anchored, core inflation is projected to rise to 2 per cent around mid-2015.
In addition, even though wage growth has been relatively modest recently, productivity growth has been weak.
As a result, the growth of unit labour costs has risen somewhat above 2 per cent in recent quarters, and is expected to contribute to the gradual rise in core inflation.
Indicators of inflation expectations are consistent with the Bank's projection, which shows inflation remaining below the 2 per cent target until around mid-2015.
In this regard, the July Consensus Economics forecasts for total CPI inflation were 1.1 per cent in 2013 and 1.7 per cent in 2014.
According to the latest Business Outlook Survey, inflation expectations have eased within the Bank's inflation-control range, with a slightly greater majority of firms expecting total CPI inflation over the next two years to remain in the bottom half of that range.
A number of firms cited the slow-growth environment as a factor driving their expectations.
In the context of increased volatility in financial markets in recent weeks, market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have also edged down, although they continue to be consistent with the 2 per cent inflation-control target.
This projection includes a path of monetary policy consistent with achieving the inflation target.
The outlook presented in this Report balances the many upside and downside risks to inflation in the projection.
Four of the most important risks are described below: three of them emanate from the external environment, while one is domestic.
The major upside risk to inflation in Canada is stronger-than-expected private demand in the United States.
Moreover, higher prices for housing and equities could cause household deleveraging to end sooner than expected.
Together, these developments would result in more rapid growth in consumption and residential investment, which in turn would give businesses greater confidence in investing and hiring, thus creating a virtuous circle for US private demand.
Although this would likely be accompanied by higher interest rates, putting some upward pressure on rates in Canada, the boost to US real GDP would more than offset the pressure on rates.
Failure to contain the crisis in Europe remains the most serious downside risk facing the global and Canadian economies.
Although Canada has limited direct trade and financial exposure to Europe, if a euro-area country or large bank were to lose access to debt markets, leading to a sudden loss of confidence, financial contagion to the United States could cause US credit spreads to widen and equity prices to fall.
Even if the situation in the euro area remains contained, weakness could persist longer than projected, owing to reform fatigue, persistently high unemployment, and delays in the necessary institutional reforms and balance-sheet repairs.
The combination of weaker foreign activity, higher lending spreads, lower commodity prices and negative confidence effects would act as a drag on Canadian growth.
The elevated level of household debt and imbalances in some segments of the housing market remain the most important domestic source of risk to the Canadian economy.
In the past several months, there has been a constructive evolution of household sector imbalances.
Nevertheless, despite the continued slowing in credit growth, the level of debt remains high.
In addition, some of the latest data point to the risk of renewed momentum in the housing market in the context of continuing very low borrowing rates.
This renewed momentum would produce a temporary boost to economic activity and inflation, but more importantly, it would exacerbate existing imbalances and therefore increase the probability of a more severe correction later on.
Such a correction could have sizable spillover effects to other parts of the economy.
Efforts by Chinese authorities to contain domestic financial risks may result in a greater-than-anticipated slowdown in credit growth and an extended period of deleveraging.
There is also a risk that the current slowdown in economic activity in other EMEs could be more severe and protracted than the Bank has projected.
In particular, the anticipated normalization of monetary policy in the United States could trigger larger capital outflows, tighter credit conditions and increased volatility in EME asset prices.
Important structural reforms, which are necessary to expand potential growth, could also be delayed.
The shock would be transmitted to the Canadian economy through weaker export sales, lower commodity prices and a deterioration in our terms of trade.
The global economy is expected to expand modestly in 2013, although its near-term dynamic has changed and the composition of growth is now slightly less favourable for Canada.
The US economy is softer than expected but, as fiscal headwinds dissipate and household deleveraging ends, growth should accelerate through 2014 and 2015.
The nascent recovery in Europe, while modest, has surprised on the upside.
China's economy is showing renewed momentum, while growth in a number of other emerging-market economies has slowed as their financial conditions have tightened.
Global financial conditions tightened from May through September in response to an anticipated slowing in the pace of asset purchases by the US Federal Reserve.
The market reaction was stronger than expected.
More recently, financial conditions have eased somewhat, following the decision in September by the Federal Reserve to maintain the pace of its asset purchases.
In advanced economies, yields on government bonds have risen from the lows reached in May, especially at longer maturities.
A notable exception is Japan, where bond yields have declined somewhat, owing to the Bank of Japan's commitment to double the monetary base by the end of 2014 by purchasing Japanese government bonds to achieve its 2 per cent inflation target.
Despite the recent tightening, global financial conditions remain highly supportive-yields on most major government bonds are low by historical standards, and equity indexes are at multi-year high levels in several advanced economies.
Yield spreads on most euro-area peripheral sovereign bonds have narrowed, reflecting signs of recovery in euro-area macroeconomic conditions and progress on reforms.
Although spreads on US corporate bonds have widened modestly since May, issuance has remained solid.
The tightening of financial conditions in EMEs has been more pronounced than in advanced economies.
The anticipation of US tapering and a reassessment of the growth prospects for some EMEs have led to capital outflows, a marked rise in bond yields and a decline in equity prices.
However, there has been significant market differentiation among EMEs: those with weaker economic fundamentals, such as large fiscal and current account deficits, high inflation and declining growth prospects, have been the most affected.
US real GDP grew by slightly less than 2 per cent during the first half of 2013.
Growth is projected to have remained modest in the second half of the year and below expectations in July.
This near-term softness has been broad-based.
Housing activity has also slowed, largely in response to the 95-basis-point rise in mortgage interest rates.
In contrast, business investment has increased, but by less than expected, despite strong corporate balance sheets.
Government spending continues to contract as the sequestration cuts are implemented.
The failure to reach a timely agreement to fund government operations resulted in a partial government shutdown in the first half of October.
In addition, the debt-ceiling debate has exacerbated the adverse impact on confidence and economic activity.
The projection for US real GDP growth in the second half of 2013 is significantly lower than in the July Report, mainly reflecting softer-than-expected domestic demand.
The drag from previous tax increases and spending cuts is expected to amount to 1.8 percentage points in 2013, and then to decline to 0.8 percentage points in 2014 and zero in 2015.
Monetary policy remains highly stimulative, with members of the Federal Open Market Committee expecting the first increase in the federal funds rate to occur only in 2015.
The expansion of US private sector demand in 2014 and 2015 should be broad-based.
Consumption is projected to increase at a more solid pace, supported by substantially healthier household balance sheets and improving labour market conditions.
Residential investment should also increase vigorously, given the strong underlying fundamentals: the still-low level of mortgage interest rates, an expected rebound in household formation, significant pent-up demand, and the decline in both actual and shadow inventories of homes.
Business investment will benefit from the improvement in demand, as well as from the solid financial positions of firms.
Exports are also projected to be an important driver of US economic growth through 2015, supported by strengthening foreign demand and improved competitiveness brought about by sustained gains in productivity and lower energy costs.
While overseas oil imports should continue to fall, reflecting the expansion in domestic supply, non-oil imports are expected to increase steadily, driven by stronger domestic demand.
Overall, US economic activity is expected to strengthen as fiscal headwinds dissipate and household deleveraging ends.
The Bank projects that the US economy will grow by 1.5 per cent in 2013, 2.5 per cent in 2014 and 3.3 per cent in 2015.
Based on past dispersion of private sector forecasts, US economic growth in 2014 would be expected to fall within  0.5 percentage points of the Bank's projection, with a somewhat wider range in 2015.
US inflation has been on a declining trend since early 2012, owing to substantial slack in the economy and various temporary factors.
As excess supply is gradually reduced over the projection period, inflation is expected to move back toward the Federal Reserve's 2 per cent inflation target.
Economic growth has resumed in the euro area, ending a six-quarter recession.
Real GDP rose by 1.1 per cent in the second quarter of 2013, a significantly stronger result than anticipated in the July Report.
Since then, survey indicators have suggested continued growth.
The economic recovery is projected to proceed slowly, however, reflecting the need to rebuild private sector balance sheets, ongoing fiscal consolidation, tight credit conditions and depressed labour markets.
While labour market competitiveness has improved in the euro-area peripheral economies, substantial cross-country differences in growth prospects are expected to persist.
A sustained recovery will require further progress in structural, fiscal and banking reforms (including a timely completion of the banking union).
As a result, uncertainty remains elevated, and the possibility of an extended period of very slow growth, as well as financial system vulnerability, still represents a downside risk to the Bank's outlook for the euro area.
However, the likelihood of that risk materializing has decreased.
Real GDP growth averaged about 4 per cent over this period, supported by significant monetary and fiscal stimulus, a weaker yen, and improved confidence.
Annual real GDP growth is expected to remain above the country's production potential over the projection horizon, reflecting the effects of Japan's ambitious program to revive economic growth and end deflation.
The pace of growth will nonetheless slow over 2014-15 as legislated increases in the value-added tax take effect.
Inflation expectations have risen materially since the end of 2012 and core inflation is no longer negative, suggesting that deflationary pressures have abated.
Real GDP growth in China increased in the third quarter, supported by additional fiscal stimulus and a re-acceleration of investment in manufacturing.
However, the continued reliance on investment activity, the rapid growth of credit and increases in housing prices have reinforced concerns about financial stability and the sustainability of economic growth.
Real GDP growth through 2015 is projected to remain close to the government's 2013 target of 7.5 per cent.
Robust growth in productivity and income, underpinned by some progress on reform measures, should support a gradual strengthening of private consumption and more sustainable investment activity.
However, structural impediments such as the lack of social safety nets and overinvestment in the export sector will slow the rebalancing of the economy.
Existing financial imbalances, together with the recent robust expansion in credit and excess capacity in a number of sectors, represent a downside risk to the Bank's projection.
To limit the depreciation of their currencies resulting from recent large capital outflows, authorities in some emerging-market countries have undertaken additional exchange rate interventions, introduced new capital controls and increased policy interest rates.
In the near term, growth will continue to be held back by tighter financial conditions and heightened uncertainty, as well as by persistent supply constraints.
Economic growth in EMEs is expected to pick up modestly over 2014-15, driven by some stabilization in credit conditions, progress on the implementation of structural reforms to alleviate supply bottlenecks and strengthening demand from the advanced economies.
Nevertheless, the recent financial market turbulence in EMEs, combined with existing domestic imbalances in a number of countries, represents a downside risk to the Bank's outlook.
Commodity prices, as measured by the Bank of Canada's commodity price index , have fallen by 6 per cent since July and are expected to remain relatively flat over the projection horizon, with a drop in crude oil prices offsetting a projected rise in the price of non-energy commodities.
On balance, however, the BCPI remains elevated, underpinned by expectations of sustained demand from China and a continued recovery in the advanced economies.
As measured by the Brent benchmark, global crude oil prices are little changed from their levels in July, while West Texas Intermediate prices have eased somewhat.
Based on the latest futures curves, both Brent and WTI crude prices are assumed to decline by just under 15 per cent by the end of 2015, reflecting a continued robust increase in supply, especially from non-conventional sources, and a reduction in geopolitical concerns.
Prices for Western Canada Select have fallen by more than 20 per cent since the release of the July Report, owing to higher production levels, ongoing transportation constraints and lower demand due to refinery outages in North America.
As a result, the spread between WTI and WCS prices has widened to approximately US$30 per barrel - the highest level since the beginning of 2013.
Based on the latest futures curves, WCS prices are expected to hover around current levels over the projection horizon, with the gap between WTI and WCS prices expected to narrow to about US$20 per barrel.
Natural gas prices in North America have moved up modestly in recent months.
The latest futures curves suggest that prices will increase further, rising slightly above US$4 per million BTU by the end of 2015, owing to growing demand for electricity generation.
Following a sharp correction over the April-June period, lumber prices have continued to recover, while base metals prices are little changed.
In contrast, agricultural prices have declined in anticipation of record harvests for key grains.
Prices for non-energy commodities are expected to rise by roughly 15 per cent over the projection horizon, supported by a gradual strengthening in global economic activity.
The projected acceleration in the growth of global demand should support a recovery of Canada's exports, although the composition has changed.
Elevated commodity prices should continue to sustain the high level of investment in the resource sector in Canada and support Canadian incomes.
The Canadian dollar has averaged roughly 97 cents US since the September fixed announcement date, compared with the 96 cents US assumed in the July Report.
By convention, the Canadian dollar is assumed to remain at or near its current level over the projection horizon.
Inflation in Canada has remained low in recent months, reflecting the significant amount of slack in the economy, heightened competitiveness pressures in the retail sector and certain sector-specific factors.
At the same time, uncertain global and domestic economic conditions are delaying the pickup in Canada's exports and investment.
As a result, the current level of economic activity is now estimated to be lower than was anticipated in the July Report.
While household spending remains solid, the continued slowing in the growth of household credit and the rise in mortgage interest rates point to a gradual unwinding of household imbalances.
While some recent developments have not been as supportive as anticipated, the Bank expects that a better balance between domestic and foreign demand will be achieved over time, resulting in stronger and more self-sustaining economic growth.
GDP growth is expected to surpass that of potential output over the next two years as foreign activity and business confidence strengthen, and underlying momentum builds in the Canadian economy.
The output gap in the base-case projection is anticipated to close around the end of 2015.
In the context of well-anchored inflation expectations, this will contribute to a gradual return of both core and total CPI inflation to 2 per cent over the same horizon.
This composition of aggregate demand is less favourable for achieving sustainable growth.
Following a rebound in the first quarter, the performance of the export sector was lacklustre during the second and third quarters, with the exception of automotive and forestry products.
Aside from temporary disruptions in the oil sector, the recent weakness in exports is indicative of a broader trend of slower-than-expected export growth that began in early 2012.
As discussed in previous Reports, the weakness may be due to shifts in trade linkages that have been difficult to properly capture and to ongoing competitiveness challenges.
The projected expansion of US business and residential investment in 2014 is still expected to fuel a rise in the growth rate of exports, albeit at a somewhat more moderate pace than expected in July.
As economic activity improves, both in the United States and globally, exports of non-energy commodities such as metals and forestry products are projected to post strong gains.
Following several disruptions in 2013, crude oil exports are also expected to contribute significantly to growth in 2014 as production continues to expand.
Non-commodity exports such as machinery and equipment, consumer goods (excluding automobiles), and services are also expected to strengthen gradually, but at a slower pace than other export sectors.
A key assumption underlying this projection is that the historical relationship between the growth rates of exports and foreign demand will gradually reassert itself once the recovery is more fully entrenched.
There is a risk that this could take longer than anticipated.
However, there are some encouraging signs that Canadian firms are taking steps to improve their export performance.
Available evidence suggests that many Canadian firms have already begun, or are planning, to expand exports to the fastest-growing emerging markets.
Similarly, through the Bank's discussions with businesses for the Business Outlook Survey, a number of firms have reported that recent investments in innovation and marketing are supporting their ability to sell in existing or new export markets.
They also consider that recent investments to improve efficiency or to lower costs are enhancing competitiveness.
As the demand for Canadian exports rises and firms fully utilize their capital, this should spur productive investments and work to improve competitiveness further.
Against this backdrop, business investment is expected to strengthen, but with a more subdued profile than in the July Report, in line with the lower profile for exports.
In particular, it is anticipated that business fixed investment will pick up over the next two years, consistent with historical relationships suggesting that business investment increases within about two to four quarters following a rise in exports.
This view is supported by responses to the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey, which point to a growing number of firms reporting that they would face some difficulty meeting an unexpected increase in demand, since they are already using their existing labour and capital more intensively while awaiting signs that demand is strengthening.
This is consistent with firms having some ability over the near term to accommodate strengthening demand but eventually needing to expand capacity.
With firms currently waiting to see a sustained increase in demand before committing to investment plans, investment intentions remain relatively subdued, even though indicators of business sentiment are close to their historical averages.
However, there are some early signs that firms might be becoming more optimistic, since sentiment indicators have generally improved from the levels observed earlier in 2013, and have been accompanied by a rise in firm creation.
The Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey, together with other recently published private surveys, shows that firms expect a better performance over the next 12 months than over the past 12 months.
Solid underlying conditions are also building a supportive foundation for investment.
Corporate balance sheets are healthy, with low aggregate leverage and abundant levels of working capital.
Despite higher long-term interest rates, financial conditions in Canada remain accommodative, given the considerable monetary stimulus currently in place.
This is underscored by responses to both the Bank's Senior Loan Officer Survey and the Business Outlook Survey, which indicate that business-lending conditions remain favourable.
Indeed, there has been some firming in business credit growth in recent months, including strong bond issuance, partly because firms are locking in at relatively low rates.
Consumption has been underpinned by an improvement in consumer confidence, together with gains in employment and disposable income, and by the large financing incentives offered on purchases of automobiles.
The recent vigour in residential investment may partly reflect activity that has been pulled forward in anticipation of higher interest rates on mortgages.
However, the growth of household credit has continued to slow and is well below its historical average, consistent with a gradual unwinding of household imbalances.
Market intelligence suggests that a number of contributing factors, including a reduction in purchases by first-time homebuyers and larger debt repayments, are also likely to be playing a role.
Despite slowing growth in household credit, consumption is still expected to increase at a moderate pace, in tandem with the expansion of disposable income.
This profile is consistent with a high degree of consumer caution, which is reflected in a savings rate that is well above the average of the past decade.
Credit conditions for households continue to be supportive of household expenditures, with effective borrowing rates at low levels.
However, the increase in mortgage rates in recent months should exert a slight dampening effect on residential investment over coming quarters.
The household debt-to-income ratio, which edged up in the second quarter and is at a high level, should have a flat-to-lower profile over the projection horizon.
In the base-case projection, debt-service ratios will rise gradually but will remain low.
While the Bank expects household caution to dampen spending over the forecast horizon, it is possible that, with still-favourable borrowing conditions, household expenditures could gather renewed momentum.
If the market strengthens further, it could increase the risk of a correction in house prices down the road.
Relative to the July Report, the outlook for economic growth in Canada is somewhat weaker over the projection horizon, owing to reduced contributions from net exports and business investment.
The Bank forecasts an improvement in the underlying momentum of the economy through 2014 as external demand strengthens and business confidence rises.
On an average annual basis, real GDP growth is projected to increase from 1.6 per cent in 2013 to 2.3 per cent in 2014 and 2.6 per cent in 2015.
Given the degree of uncertainty inherent in projections, the Bank judges that GDP growth will likely be within  0.5 percentage points of the base-case projection in 2014, with a somewhat wider range in 2015.
The pickup in the economy is projected to be driven by a rebound in the contribution of net exports.
The economy will continue to be supported by moderate growth in consumer spending, while residential investment will remain relatively flat, consistent with a convergence toward a more sustainable level of activity.
Government spending is expected to contribute only very marginally to real GDP growth over the projection horizon, in line with the plans of federal, provincial and local governments to consolidate spending to achieve fiscal balance.
Potential output grew at a noticeably slower pace during the recession.
Since 2010, the growth of Canada's production potential has begun a gradual recovery, as trend labour productivity picked up with the strong rebound in business investment.
Although much uncertainty surrounds estimates of potential output, the Bank projects that the profile for business investment will lead to further capital deepening (i.e., more capital will be available to workers) and will contribute to continued improvements in trend labour productivity over the next couple of years.
In this regard, the expected rise in machinery and equipment investment, which has been relatively weak in recent years, should support the future performance of labour productivity.
However, demographic factors, primarily the aging population, are expected to result in a slowdown in the growth rate of trend labour input and to largely offset these other effects.
On an average annual basis, potential GDP is expected to advance at a rate of around 2 per cent over the projection horizon, with a range of  0.3 percentage points.
Taking into account the various indicators of capacity pressures, the Bank judges that the amount of slack in the economy in the third quarter of 2013 was between 1 and 2 per cent.
This is a somewhat greater degree of slack than expected in the July Report, mainly because the level of real GDP in the third quarter was lower than anticipated by 0.4 per cent.
The Bank's conventional measure suggests that the output gap was close to the lower end of the 1 to 2 per cent range.
Moreover, recent data from the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey, which show that the indicators of labour shortages and capacity pressures have increased, are consistent with a gap near the lower end of this range.
In the present environment of weak demand and ongoing uncertainty about future demand, firms are using existing capacity more intensively and waiting to make investments that would increase capacity.
As they adjust their operations to current needs, more firms are reporting some challenges finding workers with specific skills or for specific positions.
An alternative structural approach suggests that the output gap is closer to 2 per cent in the third quarter.
This reflects material slack in total hours worked, as well as a level of labour productivity that is considerably below its trend.
Other labour market indicators also point to a somewhat greater degree of slack than the conventional measure.
For example, the proportion of involuntary part-time workers and the average duration of unemployment are still elevated, and wage increases remain subdued.
With the projected profile for growth in real GDP exceeding the assumed growth of potential output over the next two years, the Bank expects that the economy will gradually return to full production capacity around the end of 2015.
On balance, the economy is projected to operate with a slightly larger amount of slack over the next two years than was anticipated in the July Report.
Both core and total CPI inflation remain subdued.
With a larger and more persistent amount of excess supply in the economy than projected in July, the return to target is now expected to take place somewhat later than previously anticipated.
Core inflation edged up from an average of 1.2 per cent in the second quarter to an average of 1.3 per cent in the third quarter.
Low core inflation continues to reflect persistent material excess capacity in the economy, heightened competitiveness pressures and certain sector-specific factors.
These factors include the impact of the unwinding of the sharp rise in global agricultural prices on core food prices, as well as lower auto insurance premiums in Ontario.
Various alternative measures of core inflation have all fallen to well below 2 per cent since the second half of 2012.
Abstracting from idiosyncratic developments that affect some of these measures, the Bank assesses underlying inflation to be around 1.5 per cent.
The estimated impact of temporary factors on inflation is subject to some uncertainty.
The Bank's base-case projection assumes that these temporary factors will gradually dissipate in coming quarters.
Competitiveness pressures in the retail sector are expected to continue to dampen the level of prices, although their effects on the inflation rate are expected to dissipate in late 2014.
With well-anchored inflation expectations, core inflation is projected to return slowly to 2 per cent around the end of 2015 as excess capacity is absorbed.
Total CPI inflation also remains subdued, at just above 1 per cent on average in the third quarter, up from an average of 0.7 per cent in the second quarter.
This reflects not only the rise in core inflation but also firmer prices for a number of volatile components, notably gasoline.
The lower level of total CPI inflation relative to core largely reflects downward pressure from mortgage interest costs.
Total CPI inflation is expected to return gradually to target around the end of 2015.
Indicators of inflation expectations remain consistent with the Bank's projection, which shows inflation remaining below the 2 per cent target until around the end of 2015.
In this regard, the October Consensus Economics forecasts for total CPI inflation were 1.1 per cent in 2013 and 1.8 per cent in 2014.
According to the latest Business Outlook Survey, inflation expectations are little changed.
While almost all firms expect CPI inflation to be within the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range over the next two years, the majority expect it to remain in the bottom half of that range.
A number of firms cited the current lack of inflationary pressures and subdued demand as factors driving their expectations.
A reasonable range around the base-case projection for total inflation in 2014 is  0.3 percentage points.
They depict the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the fourth quarter of 2013 to the end of 2015.
The fundamentals that drive the outlook for inflation are subject to several risks emanating from both the external environment and the domestic economy.
The overall uncertainty surrounding the outlook is lower than it was a year ago, in part because the risks of some extreme events, such as a reintensification of the euro-area crisis, are significantly lower.
The Bank judges that the risks to the projected inflation path are roughly balanced.
The most important external risks are: More-robust economic growth than projected in the advanced economies is the major upside risk to inflation in Canada.
Once the drag from fiscal policy dissipates, the United States is poised for faster growth, given the adjustments that have already occurred in the financial and household sectors.
Growth in Europe and Japan has been faster than expected.
The combined effect might produce a virtuous circle in which a more rapid recovery boosts confidence that will feed back into demand.
Greater global demand would in turn translate into higher exports for Canada, rising commodity prices and an improvement in the terms of trade, which will support higher incomes and spending.
Despite the recent improvement in economic conditions in the euro area and the reduced risk of a reintensification of the euro-area crisis, labour markets remain severely stressed, and progress on critical reforms has been slow.
This could lead to a more protracted and difficult recovery, punctuated by renewed bouts of financial turbulence and uncertainty.
Since Canada's direct trade links to the euro area are limited, the effects would be felt mainly through confidence and financial channels, as well as through indirect trade links.
The most important domestic risks are: Canada's exports have been much weaker than anticipated and only a portion of that weakness can be explained by slower growth in foreign demand.
While the base-case forecast assumes that the wedge between the level of exports and foreign demand will persist over the projection period, there is a possibility that exports could be even weaker than assumed.
This risk could materialize if, for example, competitiveness challenges are greater than anticipated, resulting in an even larger loss of market share than assumed for exports.
Reduced exports would likely translate into slower growth in business investment, since there would be less need to expand capacity.
Uncertainty about the strength of domestic and foreign demand is weighing heavily on firms' investment intentions.
Once the recovery in foreign demand becomes more solidly entrenched, and with domestic demand continuing to grow at a moderate pace, business sentiment could improve rapidly.
The sequence of stronger exports, rising confidence and increased investment could result in stronger overall growth and is an upside risk to the inflation outlook.
The elevated level of household debt and stretched valuations in some segments of the housing market remain an important downside risk to the Canadian economy.
The continued slowing in household credit growth and the rise in mortgage interest rates point to a gradual unwinding of household imbalances.
However, recent data suggest some risk of renewed momentum in the housing market.
This would provide a temporary boost to economic activity, but could exacerbate existing imbalances and therefore increase the probability of a correction later on.
Such a correction could have sizable spillover effects to other parts of the economy and to inflation.
Global economic growth is expected to strengthen over the next two years, led by stronger momentum in the United States.
In contrast, in the euro area, GDP growth will be modest as further private deleveraging and high unemployment continue to weigh on domestic demand.
In Japan, exceptional monetary policy stimulus is projected to sustain the ongoing recovery, despite scheduled increases in the value-added tax.
China's real GDP is anticipated to grow at a more moderate, though still solid, pace over the projection horizon, with a gradual rebalancing toward consumption and away from investment and exports.
While global trade growth has plunged since 2011, a recovery is expected over the projection horizon, supported by growing international demand.
At the same time, the improvement in world economic activity should help to sustain the elevated level of commodity prices.
Overall, global economic growth is expected to rise from 2.9 per cent in 2013 to 3.4 per cent in 2014 and 3.7 per cent in 2015.
Financial conditions in the advanced economies remain highly supportive of economic growth.
The decision by the US.
Federal Open Market Committee to taper its asset purchases was well received in financial markets, compared with the outsized response in May 2013 to the initial indication that asset purchases might be reduced.
Reflecting expectations of stronger growth, especially in the United States, yields on long-term government bonds in many advanced economies have increased, and risky assets have performed well.
Financial conditions in some EMEs remain challenging, however, particularly in those economies with weak fundamentals.
As US monetary policy is normalized, there may be some overshooting in global bond yields, which would lead to tighter global financial conditions and slower global growth.
Inflation remains below target in most advanced economies, dampened by significant excess capacity.
As economic slack is reduced and labour markets firm, inflation rates in these economies are projected to move up gradually.
US economic growth in the second half of 2013 is estimated to have rebounded to more than 3.5 per cent, on average, notwithstanding the adverse effects of fiscal consolidation, higher long-term interest rates, and the added uncertainty caused by a temporary government shutdown and the debt-ceiling standoff.
There has since been an improvement in both household and business confidence, owing to the resolution of these fiscal issues and the stronger economic outlook.
While the anticipated cumulative drag on growth from fiscal policy over the next two years is largely unchanged relative to previous expectations, under the new agreement, it will be spread more evenly.
Fiscal drag is now projected to decline from 1.7 percentage points in 2013 to 0.5 percentage points in 2014 and 0.3 percentage points in 2015.
Given the improvement in economic conditions, the US.
FOMC has begun to reduce the pace of its monthly asset purchases, with further reductions conditional on the outlook for labour market conditions and inflation.
Monetary policy is expected to remain highly accommodative, however, and US financial conditions are very stimulative.
Based on the FOMC's recently revised forward guidance, policy interest rates are likely to remain at the current low levels well after the unemployment rate has declined below 6 1/2 per cent - especially if projected inflation remains under the 2 per cent target.
Equity prices have reached record levels, and yields on corporate bonds are low, leading to robust issuance.
A projected broad-based acceleration in US private demand over 2014-15 is expected to create a virtuous circle of self-sustaining growth.
Growth in consumption is expected to pick up, supported by strengthening labour market conditions, continued increases in household wealth and improved access to credit.
Even with higher mortgage interest rates, the recovery in the housing sector is projected to continue at a solid pace as bank lending conditions are eased, household formation rebounds and the stock of homes in foreclosure declines.
In addition, the growth of business investment is anticipated to increase, given improving economic conditions and less uncertainty about fiscal policy.
A robust rise in exports will likely be more than offset by an increase in non-oil imports, with net exports making a slightly negative contribution to real GDP growth over the projection horizon.
Overall, US real GDP growth is expected to rise from 1.9 per cent in 2013 to 3.0 per cent in 2014 and 3.2 per cent in 2015.
This growth profile is stronger than anticipated in the October Report, reflecting broad-based strength in US private demand.
There is a risk, however, that US economic growth could surprise further on the upside if businesses increased investment spending more rapidly than projected in response to reduced policy uncertainty and a rekindling of "animal spirits.
" Such a scenario would have broad positive spillover effects on the global economy.
Inflation has been trending lower over the past two years in many advanced economies, in some cases falling well below target levels.
This generalized weakness likely reflects common international factors, such as reductions in global food and energy prices, as well as the impact from still sizable negative output gaps and high unemployment.
The downward trend of inflation in the advanced economies is expected to reverse over the projection horizon.
In the United States, strengthening growth is expected to reduce economic slack and move inflation closer to the 2 per cent target toward the end of 2015.
In Japan, core inflation has become positive for the first time in five years in response to aggressive monetary policy stimulus.
It is expected to rise further over the projection horizon, with an anticipated increase in wages contributing importantly to this movement.
Given the muted recovery in the euro area, the output gap will remain sizable, and the rise in inflation is expected to be limited.
Compared with the advanced economies, inflation remains relatively high in many EMEs, driven in part by exchange rate depreciations that have pushed up import prices.
The recent tightening in monetary policy in some EMEs, combined with structural reforms that will help to relieve supply constraints, is projected to lead to a reduction in inflation in these economies.
Commodity prices, as measured by the Bank of Canada's commodity price index , are elevated.
High commodity prices continue to reflect the growing importance of China and other EMEs.
In particular, China's solid growth outlook and the size of its economy mean that the demand for commodities should continue to be robust.
Moreover, ongoing urbanization and an expanding middle class in China and other EMEs are expected to support commodity prices over the medium term.
The BCPI is projected to stay relatively flat through 2014-15, in light of roughly offsetting movements in the prices of energy and non-energy commodities.
Based on the latest futures curves, crude oil prices will decline over the projection horizon, reflecting higher production, especially in North America, and a gradual easing of geopolitical concerns.
Lumber prices are anticipated to increase, supported by the ongoing recovery in the US housing sector, while base metals prices are projected to rise in response to stronger global demand.
The anticipated upturn in advanced and emerging-market economies, led by the United States, is expected to result in an improved performance for Canada's exports.
Robust global demand for commodities is projected to sustain the elevated level of investment in the resource sector in Canada and to support Canadian income levels.
The Canadian dollar has recently fallen to around 91 cents US, compared with the 97 cents US assumed in the October Report.
This depreciation likely reflects the improved growth prospects in the United States, as well as reduced safe-haven effects that had pushed the Canadian dollar higher in the aftermath of the global financial crisis.
Inflation has moved further below the 2 per cent target in recent months.
The downward pressure on prices principally reflects a significant amount of excess supply in the economy and heightened competition in the retail sector.
The effects of these factors appear to be greater than had been anticipated.
At the same time, Canada's economic growth strengthened in the second half of 2013, and prospects have improved somewhat relative to the October Report, given expectations of firmer growth in US demand.
While as yet there are no signs of a rebalancing toward exports and business investment, the strengthening of the global economy and recent depreciation of the Canadian dollar should foster a broadening of the composition of growth in Canada.
As excess capacity is gradually absorbed and the effects of competition wane, the Bank expects that inflation will return to 2 per cent in about two years, although the profile of inflation is now lower than projected in October.
The Canadian economy is continuing to adjust to the aftermath of the global financial crisis and the ensuing recession, as well as to significantly higher global prices for Canada's commodity exports compared with the 1990s average.
These large and persistent forces have had important sectoral and regional effects, and will continue to influence the composition of exports and business investment in coming years.
Real GDP growth is estimated to have risen somewhat above the growth rate of potential output in the second half of 2013.
However, the shift in the composition of aggregate demand necessary for sustainable growth has not yet occurred.
The moderate growth trend in consumer spending remained supportive of overall growth, while residential investment failed to slow to the extent anticipated.
At the same time, non-commodity exports continued to disappoint, and business investment recovered more slowly than expected.
Excess capacity in the economy remains significant.
Taking into account the various indicators of capacity pressures and the uncertainty surrounding any point estimates, the Bank judges that the amount of excess supply in the fourth quarter of 2013 was between 3/4 per cent and 1 3/4 per cent, slightly less than estimated in the October Report.
Real GDP growth is projected to rise from 1.8 per cent in 2013 to 2.5 per cent on an average annual basis in both 2014 and 2015, underpinned by the ongoing firming in the US economy, which will lead to more broadly based growth in global demand.
With foreign demand expected to strengthen, the Bank's best judgment is that net exports will return to making a positive contribution to overall growth at the beginning of 2014.
Total exports are projected to increase at a moderately stronger pace than expected in the October Report.
Growth in all three major export groupings - energy-related commodities, non-energy commodities and non-commodities - is expected to pick up, although commodity exports will contribute the most to growth in GDP.
The stronger performance in the trade sector should be supported by the depreciation of the Canadian dollar in recent months.
Sustained growth in exports should stimulate improvements in business confidence and lead to a more solid contribution from business fixed investment over time.
Imports should also strengthen, given supply-chain linkages in the foreign trade sector and the high import content of business investment, particularly investment in machinery and equipment.
The economy will continue to be supported by moderate growth in consumer spending, while the level of residential investment is expected to remain relatively unchanged, commensurate with a convergence toward a more sustainable level of activity.
Overall, recent developments are consistent with some degree of consumer caution and a soft landing of the housing market.
Housing starts moderated in 2013 compared with 2012, particularly in regions that are not benefiting directly from the energy sector and related interprovincial migration.
In the anticipation of higher mortgage rates, there was some pulling forward of house purchases over the summer.
As expected, this uptick was temporary, and sales of existing homes have since slowed to a level close to their historical average.
House price growth also moderated in 2013 relative to 2012.
Overall credit growth has firmed in recent months, largely reflecting the pickup in resale activity earlier in the year, but remains consistent with the Bank's view that the ratio of household debt to disposable income will stabilize over the projection horizon.
With the projected profile for the growth of real GDP exceeding the growth of potential output, the Bank expects that the economy will gradually return to its full production capacity over the next two years.
Non-commodity exports have remained disappointingly weak in recent quarters, despite the strengthening US economy over this period.
Ongoing competitiveness challenges, including competition in the US market from emerging-market economies such as China and Mexico, may have played a greater role than previously estimated.
Restructuring in global supply chains is affecting global trade patterns and may also have contributed to the weakness in exports.
Ongoing adjustments to the terms of trade mean that commodity and non-commodity exports will continue to grow at different rates over the projection horizon.
The non-commodity sector is expected to benefit from a US-led strengthening in foreign demand, which appears more firmly entrenched than in October.
A key assumption underlying the base-case projection is that growth in the non-commodity sector will pick up gradually over the next two years, but will remain slower than the pace of growth of foreign demand.
While this assumption is prudent, there is a risk that the recovery in non-commodity exports may take even longer than anticipated, given ongoing competitiveness challenges and potential supply constraints.
Energy exports have been hampered during the past year by temporary production shutdowns and transportation bottlenecks.
As uncertainty about the outlook dissipates, competitiveness pressures to improve productivity and the need to expand capacity to meet sustained increases in foreign demand are expected to lead to stronger business investment.
This should be the case particularly for investment in machinery and equipment, which has been held back by cyclical factors as well as adjustments of the manufacturing sector to the effects of the relatively high terms of trade.
These incentives to invest will add to those stemming from the steady growth in domestic demand.
Financial conditions in Canada remain supportive of investment, with strong investor demand reflected in relatively narrow corporate bond spreads and buoyant equity prices, suggesting confidence in the future profitability of the corporate sector.
Responses to the Bank's latest Senior Loan Officer Survey and Business Outlook Survey also indicate that credit conditions remain favourable.
Moreover, business credit growth remains above its historical average, although it has slowed somewhat in recent months.
Canadian firms should also be more inclined to invest, since the lower value of the Canadian dollar is boosting both activity and profitability in the export sector.
There are some encouraging signs that confidence is gradually building.
Intentions to invest in machinery and equipment have increased for the first time since the fourth quarter of 2012, although firms also report that investments are still depressed by uncertainty, notably with respect to domestic demand.
The results of the latest survey conducted by Export Development Canada show that for the first time since the spring of 2011, the balance of opinion regarding global economic conditions is positive, and that firms are more optimistic about international business opportunities.
Inflation has continued to surprise on the downside in recent months, with core inflation at 1.1 per cent in November and total CPI inflation at 0.9 per cent.
Alternative measures of core inflation have all fallen since the second half of 2012, with most currently at or slightly above 1 per cent.
Persistently weak inflation is not unique to Canada, but is also being observed in other advanced economies.
There are several factors underlying the broad-based weakness in inflation in Canada.
The significant and persistent slack in the Canadian economy has contributed to a marked increase since mid-2012 in the proportion of core consumer goods and services for which prices are increasing by less than 2 per cent.
Heightened competition in the retail sector is also contributing to the weakness in inflation.
This has been reflected in the unusual softness in the prices for core food items and non-durable goods, two sectors where anecdotal evidence suggests that competition is most intense.
Moreover, there is a possibility that a given amount of excess supply is having a larger impact on inflation than had been anticipated.
This could be especially the case if excess supply has persisted for a long time.
Both core and total CPI inflation are projected to remain around 1 per cent in the first half of 2014 and to increase very gradually toward the target, as excess capacity is absorbed and the impact of increased competition dissipates.
The depreciation of the Canadian dollar in the past year is also expected to exert some upward pressure on inflation.
The lower profile for inflation relative to October mainly reflects the Bank's assessment that the effects of heightened competition on inflation will be more widespread and persistent than previously assumed.
While increased competition will have a permanent effect on the level of prices, its impact on the rate of inflation will be transitory.
The assumption in the Bank's base-case projection is that it will subtract around 0.3 percentage points from core inflation in 2014, with the effects largely dissipating by around the middle of 2015.
To the extent that the effects of increased retail competition have a transitory impact on inflation, they should not necessarily elicit a monetary policy response unless they induce a change in inflation expectations.
The January Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation was 1.5 per cent for 2014 and 1.9 per cent for 2015.
According to the latest Business Outlook Survey, inflation expectations remain steady, with almost all firms expecting CPI inflation to be within the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range over the next two years, and with the majority expecting inflation to remain in the bottom half of that range.
Based on the past dispersion of private sector forecasts, a reasonable range around the base-case projection for total inflation in 2014 is  0.3 percentage points.
Chart 19 and Chart 20 show the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the first quarter of 2014 to the end of 2015.
The degree of uncertainty around the inflation forecast, and the range of weaker-than-projected outcomes in particular, are important considerations for policy in light of the low level of inflation and the recent series of downside surprises.
The outlook for inflation is subject to several risks emanating from both the external environment and the domestic economy.
The most important risks to inflation are: The major upside risk to inflation in Canada is the possibility of stronger-than-expected growth in US private demand.
As the economy strengthens and uncertainty dissipates, business sentiment should improve, and firms may not only increase investment, but they may also make up for the previous shortfall.
This would boost economic activity and confidence more generally, leading to positive spillover effects throughout the US economy.
It would also likely be accompanied by higher US market interest rates and a stronger US dollar.
Although this would put upward pressure on market interest rates in Canada, these effects would be more than offset by the increase in US real GDP.
Stronger US demand would be transmitted to the Canadian economy through the trade channel and firmer commodity prices, as well as through reduced uncertainty and positive confidence effects.
Over the past two years, a significant wedge has emerged between the level of Canadian exports and that of foreign demand.
While prospects for the global economy have improved and the Canadian dollar has depreciated in the past year, the base-case projection is conservative in assuming that only a small portion of this wedge will dissipate over the next two years.
However, with the performance of exports still disappointing, there is a risk that the growth rate of exports will continue to fall below that of foreign activity in coming years.
This could reflect more intense competitiveness pressures or an inability to respond rapidly to increases in demand, given the reduced production capacity in some export sectors.
A weaker recovery of exports would translate into slower growth in business investment.
Together, weaker growth in both exports and business investment would pose a downside risk to inflation.
The evolution of the housing sector continues to support the Bank's soft-landing scenario.
Housing starts are largely in line with demographic demand, and resale activity is close to its historical average.
Households remain vulnerable to adverse economic shocks, however, given that household leverage remains elevated and the ratio of house prices to income is close to its all-time high.
The risk of a disorderly unwinding of household sector imbalances, should it materialize, could have sizable spillover effects on other parts of the economy and on inflation.
The global economic expansion is expected to strengthen over the next three years as headwinds that have been restraining activity dissipate.
Fiscal consolidation in many advanced economies, which has been a heavy drag on global growth, has diminished significantly.
Private deleveraging also appears well advanced.
Uncertainty about future demand is receding and monetary policy continues to be highly stimulative.
This is creating favourable financial conditions for a rebound in household and business spending.
Economic reforms are also anticipated to support and help rebalance growth in a number of economies over time.
Stronger demand should boost global trade, helping to lay the foundation for self-sustaining economic growth.
Trade has been restrained by a number of factors, including modest investment growth in many advanced economies, and notable increases in trade restrictions.
Recent trade data show tentative signs of improvement, however, and suggest that some of these factors have started to unwind.
Global economic growth is expected to increase from 2.9 per cent in 2013 to 3.3 per cent in 2014 and 3.7 per cent in 2015 and 2016 - largely unchanged relative to the January Report.
In this context, a number of commodity prices that are important for Canada's terms of trade appear to be well supported.
While the risks to the global outlook appear roughly balanced, and remain lower than in earlier periods, there is increased concern about the sustainability of growth in China and other emerging-market economies , persistently low inflation in advanced economies, and recent geopolitical events.
Global financial conditions continue to support growth, against the backdrop of a gradual tapering of asset purchases by the US Federal Reserve.
In advanced economies, financial conditions are buoyant.
Yields on long-term government bonds are broadly unchanged since the last Report and remain low by historical standards, while many equity markets are near all-time highs.
Credit conditions for firms, especially in the United States, continue to be accommodative, with low corporate spreads encouraging strong debt issuance.
Meanwhile, in emerging-market economies, financial conditions have tightened, and market volatility has increased, partly in response to political uncertainty.
Nevertheless, volatility has remained well below historical averages.
Economies with weaker fundamentals have experienced the largest deterioration in financial conditions, and several central banks in EMEs have been forced to boost policy interest rates in an effort to stabilize markets.
The US economy is expected to gather momentum, with growth projected to increase from around 2 per cent in 2013 to average around 3 per cent over the next three years.
Based on the past dispersion of private sector forecasts, US economic growth in 2014 is expected to fall within  0.5 percentage points of the Bank's projection, with a somewhat wider range in 2015 and 2016.
Following robust growth in the second half of 2013, the pace of the US economic expansion in early 2014 has slowed abruptly.
Unseasonably cold weather and severe snowstorms led to temporary supply-chain disruptions, a reduction in construction activity and a delay in some consumer expenditures.
Much of this activity is expected to be recovered, as demonstrated by the recent rebound in motor vehicle sales, purchasing managers' indexes and employment.
The Bank expects that US output growth will accelerate as the dampening effects of household deleveraging, fiscal consolidation and uncertainty dissipate.
Although the US Federal Reserve reduced the pace of its monthly asset purchases at its meeting in March, from $65 billion to $55 billion, monetary policy continues to ease.
The recent policy announcement from the Federal Open Market Committee moved from quantitative to qualitative guidance and also suggested that monetary policy will remain accommodative "even after employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels.
" In this context, private domestic demand is expected to strengthen.
Rising household wealth and improving labour market conditions are projected to drive consumer spending.
A strong recovery in the housing market is also anticipated to continue, albeit at a slightly slower pace than projected in January, as tight mortgage-lending standards and difficult labour market conditions for younger workers dampen household formation.
In light of reduced policy and economic uncertainty, there is an upside risk that consumers and businesses (particularly given the healthy state of corporate balance sheets) could increase spending at a more rapid pace than projected.
Such a scenario would have broad positive spillover effects on the global economy.
Net exports are expected to exert a small drag on US economic growth over the projection horizon.
Rising foreign demand for exports will be outweighed by even faster import growth driven by strong domestic demand.
Non-energy imports are expected to rise, while increased US production of oil and natural gas will continue to push energy imports lower.
Persistent and significant excess capacity in many advanced economies has pushed inflation well below policy targets.
In the euro area, despite a strengthening and broadening of growth following progress in deleveraging, inflation has continued to decline, and inflation expectations have shifted down significantly.
While inflation is expected to rise gradually over the projection horizon as excess supply is absorbed, there is a risk that disinflation could continue, and perhaps even develop into deflation.
If this were to occur, it would threaten the expansion by increasing real debt burdens and leading households and businesses to delay expenditures.
In addition, the Russia-Ukraine situation represents an important downside risk to Europe's fragile recovery.
Meanwhile, in Japan, subdued inflation also remains a risk, despite an important pickup in both total and core inflation over the past year following the introduction of aggressive monetary easing.
Recently, domestic demand has been particularly strong, with the pulling forward of consumption ahead of the increase in the value-added tax in April.
However, progress toward Japan's inflation target will require continued momentum in economic activity.
In China, economic growth is projected to remain between 7 and 7 1/2 per cent over the next three years.
The authorities are expected to encourage a rotation of demand away from investment and toward consumption, while reining in credit growth.
There is, however, considerable uncertainty about how this rotation will unfold.
There is a risk that the property market in China could cool faster than anticipated as credit slows.
Given the close links among banks, property developers and the shadow banking sector, weakness in the housing sector could cause serious financial system stress and depress real economic activity.
Heightened uncertainty and tightening financial conditions are expected to restrain growth in other EMEs in the first half of this year.
Activity is then anticipated to strengthen as external demand picks up, and as further progress is made on economic reforms.
Nevertheless, as global financial conditions normalize, investors will continue to reassess the prospects for EMEs.
This could lead to increased volatility, capital outflows and severe financial market turbulence.
Such a scenario would dampen global demand, commodity prices and Canada's terms of trade.
Recent supply developments have supported energy and agricultural prices.
West Texas Intermediate prices have increased by 10 per cent since the January Report, as easing transportation constraints have substantially lowered inventories at Cushing compared with last year.
Agricultural prices have surged since January.
Prices for grain products have risen, reflecting droughts in South America and parts of the United States, and the turmoil in Ukraine.
Cattle and hog prices have also moved sharply higher, owing to concerns about depleted herd sizes and a deadly virus attacking piglets.
At the same time, there has been downward pressure on base metals prices, particularly copper, reflecting concerns about slowing demand in China.
It is important to note that the Bank has changed its working assumption for the profile of energy prices in its base-case projection.
Whereas in the past the Bank had assumed that energy prices would follow the futures curves, it now assumes that energy prices will remain near their current levels.
Recent empirical work has shown that this approach provides a more accurate forecast, on average, than the futures curve and is also consistent with the technical assumption the Bank uses for the exchange rate.
Prices for Brent, West Texas Intermediate and Western Canada Select have recently averaged approximately US$107, US$101 and US$80, respectively.
The Bank's latest analysis of demand and supply factors suggests that the risks are likely tilted to the downside.
In particular, if US shale oil production were to exceed current estimates, and some members of OPEC were to bring production back on line more rapidly than anticipated, prices would likely fall below the level assumed in the base case.
Prices for many non-energy commodities are expected to rise with the pickup in global activity.
Consistent with the expected high level of oil prices, Canada's terms of trade should remain elevated.
Rising global demand for non-energy commodities, combined with the assumed high level of oil prices, should support Canadian investment.
The Canadian dollar has averaged approximately 91 cents US since the March fixed announcement date, in line with the assumption in January.
The fundamental determinants of growth and inflation in Canada continue to strengthen gradually, as anticipated in the January Report.
Although recent data for inflation were slightly higher than expected, excess supply in the economy and heightened competition in the retail sector will likely keep core inflation well below 2 per cent this year.
Total CPI inflation is now forecast to be higher than core inflation over the coming quarters and closer to the 2 per cent target.
This principally reflects observed and expected increases in consumer energy prices, which have a temporary effect on the inflation rate.
Underlying forces therefore need to be in place to close the output gap and cause core inflation to rise; otherwise, total inflation would drift back down below the target.
The Bank expects that, as excess capacity is gradually absorbed and the effects of competition wane, core inflation will return to 2 per cent by early 2016.
Given this projected dynamic, the Bank expects that total inflation will reach 2 per cent by early next year and will remain there for the rest of the projection period.
Economic growth in Canada is projected to average about 2 1/2 per cent in 2014 and 2015.
The Bank continues to expect that the gradual strengthening of the global economy and the recent depreciation of the Canadian dollar will lead to a broadening of the composition of growth in Canada.
Meanwhile, recent developments are in line with the Bank's expectation of a soft landing in the housing market and stabilizing debt-to-income ratios for households.
The effects of the higher profile for oil prices on the terms of trade and, in turn, consumption are largely offset by recent information suggesting some further delay in the pickup in exports and business investment.
By 2016, real GDP growth in Canada is anticipated to slow to closer to 2 per cent, which corresponds to the Bank's estimate for the growth rate of potential output.
However, there is the usual degree of uncertainty as to what the precise path of potential output growth will be over the coming years.
In part, this is because potential output responds to stronger aggregate demand through increased business investment, firm creation and greater labour force participation.
The Bank's core measure of inflation has remained subdued, fluctuating within a narrow range and averaging about 1.2 per cent since the latter part of 2012.
Weak inflation has been observed across a broad range of core goods and services, and the effects are therefore evident in all measures of core inflation that the Bank monitors.
While the Bank's target is based on total CPI inflation, these core measures allow the Bank to focus on the underlying trend of inflation by excluding price movements that can temporarily affect total CPI inflation.
The fundamental factor behind the weak core inflation numbers is the persistent slack in the Canadian economy.
The estimated impact of excess supply on inflation is even stronger once the effects of sector-specific price movements are removed.
Taking into account the various indicators of capacity pressures and the uncertainty surrounding any point estimates, the Bank judges that the amount of excess supply in the first quarter of 2014 was still material, at between 1/2 per cent and 1 1/2 per cent.
This is slightly less than estimated in the January Report.
Labour market indicators, including subdued wage increases, are consistent with the persistence of material excess supply in the economy.
Heightened competition in the retail sector, especially for core food items and non-durable goods, also remains a key contributor to subdued core inflation.
The depreciation of the Canadian dollar over the past year has put some temporary upward pressure on inflation, partially offsetting the impact of excess supply and retail competition.
The lower Canadian dollar also appears to have reduced the gap between Canadian and US consumer prices, suggesting less scope for downward price pressure in some price components.
The Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey indicates that firms are already noticing an increase in the prices of non-labour inputs, although many note that intense competition may limit the extent to which these costs will be passed on to consumer prices.
While total CPI inflation has lately averaged about the same rate as core inflation, recent indicators suggest that several of the volatile components will push up total CPI inflation close to the target in the coming quarters.
In particular, energy prices are expected to increase noticeably, owing not only to higher gasoline prices but also to a sharp rise in natural gas prices.
The depreciation of the Canadian dollar is also contributing to the divergence between core and total inflation, since some of the key volatile components excluded from the core measure are particularly sensitive to exchange rate movements.
While core inflation is projected to increase as the impact of retail competition gradually fades, the economy will need to have reached its full capacity for inflation to be maintained at the 2 per cent target.
Above-potential growth is therefore needed to close the output gap; this is expected to be achieved with a larger contribution to growth from exports and investment.
While energy exports were stronger in 2013 than previously anticipated, non-energy export categories have continued to underperform relative to foreign activity.
Competitiveness challenges have weighed on exports, as evidenced by the further losses in Canada's market share.
In addition, supply constraints in some export sectors, or an increased reliance on the foreign affiliates of Canadian firms to fulfill foreign demand, might have played a role.
Weakness in Canadian non-energy exports is broadly in line with the sharp slowing in global trade since 2011.
Given the continued strengthening in global growth, particularly the firmer and more broadly based growth in the United States, Canada's non-energy exports are expected to gather momentum in coming quarters.
A wide range of export sectors are expected to benefit, including those linked to US construction activity, such as logging and building materials.
As US investment in machinery and equipment strengthens, export sectors, such as industrial, electrical and electronic machinery and equipment, computers, and aircraft, should strengthen.
The contribution of other sectors that have performed well over the past decade relative to foreign activity, such as commercial services and pharmaceutical products, should continue.
The recent depreciation of the Canadian dollar, which has reversed a small part of the earlier deterioration in Canada's competitiveness, should help to promote stronger growth in exports.
Although there are some encouraging signs, it is likely that the long lags involved in re-establishing supply chains and sales networks, as well as continued competitiveness challenges, will weigh on the ability of Canadian firms to benefit from stronger growth abroad.
The Bank's base-case projection therefore continues to assume that non-commodity exports will grow at a somewhat slower pace than foreign demand.
Energy exports, which were hampered in 2013 by temporary production shutdowns and transportation bottlenecks, are expected to strengthen in 2014 and to grow at a faster pace than foreign demand.
This reflects announced plans by major producers to increase output, the growing use of Canadian heavy oil in US refineries and further growth in rail transportation capacity.
The higher level of energy prices should also increase revenues and profits in the resource sector.
Indeed, recent data suggest a noticeable rise in the terms of trade in the first quarter.
As exports strengthen and uncertainty about future demand diminishes, growth in business investment is expected to rise gradually.
The most recent survey by Statistics Canada reports only a modest increase in business investment intentions for 2014, with the notable exception of the manufacturing sector, where a significant pickup is expected.
Nonetheless, healthy corporate balance sheets and the low cost of capital are providing solid support.
Business credit growth remains above its historical average, and the Bank's most recent Business Outlook and Senior Loan Officer surveys suggest that credit conditions have eased slightly in recent months.
According to the latest results from the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey, intentions regarding investment in machinery and equipment have turned positive for export-oriented manufacturing firms, notably those related to capital goods and transportation equipment.
Overall, total exports are expected to pick up, but their profile is lower than in the January Report.
This is mainly due to weaker-than-expected exports in early 2014 and a somewhat more subdued profile for foreign activity, particularly for US residential investment.
With a slightly more modest outlook for exports, the profile for business investment in the Bank's base-case scenario is lower than in January.
The economy will also continue to be supported by moderate growth in consumer spending over the projection horizon, broadly in line with the growth of household disposable income and the savings rate near its current level.
Residential investment is expected to remain relatively unchanged as its share of the overall economy declines to a more sustainable level.
However, since interest rates have been low for a long time, this effect will soon level off.
The profile for household spending is consistent with credit growth remaining well below the historical average and a stabilization of household debt-to-income ratios over the projection horizon.
Overall, real GDP growth is projected to average around 2 1/2 per cent in 2014 and 2015, before easing close to the growth rate in the economy's potential output of 2 per cent in 2016.
Given the degree of uncertainty inherent in projections, the Bank judges that GDP growth will likely be within  0.5 percentage points of the base-case projection in 2014, with a somewhat wider range in 2015 and 2016.
With the projected profile for real GDP growth exceeding the growth of potential output, the Bank expects that the economy will gradually return to its full production capacity over the next two years.
The growth rate of potential output is expected to remain fairly stable, at around 2 per cent, with a rise in the growth rate of trend labour productivity being offset by a further decline in the growth of trend labour input, associated with demographic forces.
The projected rise in trend labour productivity assumes benefits from the growth in business investment that will contribute to further capital deepening.
However, the future path for potential output could deviate from that projected in the base-case scenario.
In particular, the contribution of trend labour productivity growth will depend on many factors, notably, the strength of the demand for Canadian goods and services, the amount invested by existing firms in research and development and technology, and the number of new firms created.
Core inflation is projected to remain just above 1 per cent in the first half of 2014 and to return gradually to 2 per cent by early 2016, as excess capacity is absorbed and the impact of increased competition dissipates.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that competition effects could last longer than previously assumed.
The lower Canadian dollar, in contrast, is expected to continue to exert some upward pressure on inflation over the next few quarters.
This upward pressure comes from direct effects on the prices of imported goods and services, as well as indirect effects through higher demand.
Total CPI inflation is projected to remain above core inflation until around the end of next year, mainly reflecting higher energy prices.
While total CPI inflation is projected to remain above core inflation and close to the target, there is much uncertainty about its profile, given that the total CPI incorporates movements in very volatile components such as gasoline and natural gas prices.
As an example, if the base-case scenario were to assume that oil prices were 10 per cent lower , total CPI inflation would be lower by 0.3 percentage points over the coming year.
Moreover, there is uncertainty about the extent to which the impact of recent depreciation in the Canadian dollar on inflation will be offset by the effects of competition.
The Bank uses core inflation as an operational guide to look through inflation movements that are likely to be temporary.
Excess supply must be absorbed to prevent total CPI inflation from falling back below the 2 per cent target once the effects of volatile components unwind.
The higher profile for total CPI inflation should reinforce the anchoring of inflation expectations at the 2 per cent target.
Indicators of short-term inflation expectations are somewhat below the Bank's projection.
The March Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation was 1.5 per cent for 2014 and 1.9 per cent for 2015.
Similarly, over 90 per cent of the firms surveyed in the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey expect inflation to be within the 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range, with the majority in the bottom half of the range.
Market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations also remain consistent with the 2 per cent target.
Chart 19 and Chart 20 show the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the second quarter of 2014 to the end of 2016.
The degree of uncertainty around the inflation forecast, and the range of weaker-than-projected outcomes in particular, are important considerations for policy in light of the low level of core inflation.
The most important risks to inflation are: Stronger-than-expected private demand in the United States is the most important upside risk to inflation in Canada.
With strong corporate balance sheets and reduced uncertainty, businesses could boost investment by more than expected as they take advantage of firming demand.
Similarly, as deleveraging dissipates, consumer spending could accelerate at a stronger pace.
Each of these scenarios would boost economic activity and confidence more generally, leading to positive spillover effects throughout the US economy.
Stronger US activity would in turn translate into higher exports for Canada and firmer commodity prices.
In addition, private domestic demand in Canada would benefit from positive effects on confidence.
This realignment of export growth with foreign activity will also be aided by the recent depreciation of the Canadian dollar.
To date, however, the anticipated rebound in non-energy exports has proven to be elusive.
The precise timing of the realignment in growth is highly uncertain and could take longer than currently anticipated by the Bank.
A slower recovery in non-energy exports would also translate into slower growth in business investment, particularly investment in machinery and equipment.
Efforts by the Chinese authorities to address vulnerabilities in the shadow banking sector and engineer a soft landing in the real estate sector could result in a greater-than-anticipated slowdown in credit growth and an extended period of deleveraging that would weigh on growth.
There is also a risk that increased political uncertainty in other EMEs, lack of progress on economic reforms and/or uncertainty surrounding the impact of the normalization of US monetary policy could trigger larger capital outflows and tighter credit conditions.
Recent housing data continue to support the Bank's base-case scenario of a soft landing.
Housing starts have generally been below the Bank's estimate of demographic demand for over a year, and resale activity has also been below its 10-year average since November 2013.
However, high levels of debt and near-record house prices relative to income continue to leave households vulnerable to adverse shocks.
The global economic expansion is modest and uneven.
While global growth is expected to gather momentum, the resulting profile is weaker than anticipated at the time of the April Report.
Global economic growth is expected to be 2.9 per cent in 2014, picking up to 3.6 per cent in 2015 and 3.7 per cent in 2016.
Two headwinds, associated with fiscal consolidation and private sector deleveraging, are already diminishing.
The third, related to uncertainty surrounding economic policies and economic prospects more generally, is lingering, as evidenced by the serial disappointment in global growth over recent years.
Over time, this headwind is also expected to dissipate and the global expansion to continue, supported by highly accommodative monetary policies and increasingly buoyant financial conditions.
The global economy experienced a widespread slowdown in activity, investment and trade in the first quarter, reflecting the coincident occurrence of a diverse set of country-specific factors.
In particular, real US GDP contracted by 2.9 per cent, partly due to temporary and one-off factors, such as a slowdown in inventory investment, the expiration of fiscal measures (for example, extended unemployment benefits) at the beginning of 2014 and severe winter weather.
Nevertheless, these factors can only partially explain the broad-based weakness in the first quarter, suggesting that there is less underlying momentum in the US economy.
Economic activity in the euro area continued to expand modestly in the first quarter.
Growth was uneven, with the strength in Germany offset by contracting or stagnant activity in many other countries.
In contrast, real GDP in Japan jumped sharply in the first quarter, but this reflected a pulling forward of growth before the April increase in the value-added tax from 5 per cent to 8 per cent.
In China, growth slowed to its weakest pace since 2009.
Meanwhile, in other emerging-market economies , activity was weighed down by political uncertainty in several regions and tightening financial conditions.
Many of the factors contributing to slower growth in the first quarter appear to be country-specific and their effects are likely to be transitory.
The conditions supporting a rebound in global activity remain in place, albeit starting from a weaker level of activity than previously expected.
The widespread nature of the slowdown, however, suggests that there could be less underlying momentum in the global economy.
Most of the factors restraining the pace of the global economic expansion in recent years have dissipated further, although some continue to have an impact.
Fiscal drag is diminishing significantly in many advanced economies.
Household deleveraging in the United States and some other countries is well advanced, which should support domestic demand.
At the same time, uncertainty appears to be undermining business confidence and restraining investment.
Such uncertainty is expected to dissipate as the recovery strengthens - boosting investment and thus putting international trade and commodity prices on a firmer footing - although that has yet to happen.
Bottlenecks and other structural impediments that are hindering growth in the EMEs are also expected to be mitigated by ongoing economic reforms.
Global financial conditions have become even more buoyant since the last Report.
These conditions reflect the exceptionally stimulative monetary policies in the major advanced economies, which, in some cases, eased further during this period.
In June, in response to declining inflation, weak growth and ongoing financial fragmentation, the European Central Bank announced further stimulus measures, lowering its main interest rate to 0.15 per cent and introducing a negative deposit rate.
Meanwhile, central bank balance sheets continue to expand in some countries.
In the United States, although the Federal Reserve continues to reduce the size of its asset purchases, its balance sheet is still expanding, providing additional monetary stimulus.
Moreover, the Federal Open Market Committee has reiterated its expectations that economic conditions may warrant monetary policy remaining accommodative "even after employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels."
In this context, market expectations that policy interest rates will remain low for an extended period, the search for yield and an increase in the demand for safe assets by banks are also exerting downward pressure on long-term interest rates.
Stock markets are at or near recent highs, credit spreads have narrowed, and issuance remains robust.
Furthermore, measures of market volatility - both forward-looking and realized - have fallen further below historical averages across a range of asset classes.
After tightening in the first quarter, financial conditions in EMEs have also improved, with strengthening equity markets and narrowing spreads.
Led by the United States, growth in the advanced economies is expected to bounce back and strengthen through 2014.
The rebound is not anticipated to make up for the weakness in the first quarter, however, leaving the level of GDP on a lower path than assumed in the April Report.
Over time, the expansion in the advanced economies is anticipated to return their economies to potential and enable them to achieve natural growth that is no longer reliant on exceptional monetary policy stimulus.
Domestic demand in the United States is expected to pick up, underpinned by an expansion of credit, rising financial and housing wealth, and improving labour market conditions.
Residential investment is also expected to benefit from these factors, together with a rise in household formation and a gradual easing in credit standards as the competition for new mortgage lending intensifies.
Recent labour market indicators have been encouraging, with roughly 230,000 net new jobs created, on average, over the past six months; job openings rising to their highest level since August 2007; and the unemployment rate declining to 6.1 per cent.
Despite these improvements, other labour market indicators, such as modest wage growth and elevated long-term unemployment, suggest that there is still considerable slack in the labour market, which is projected to keep inflationary pressures contained.
Business investment is expected to strengthen as uncertainty about future demand diminishes, the cost of capital remains low and firms seek to put their ample cash holdings to work.
That being said, momentum appears to be weaker than anticipated in April.
For example, indicators such as construction spending and shipments of capital goods suggest a somewhat lower profile for business investment through 2014.
Overall, the US economy is expected to grow by around 1 1/2 per cent this year, before strengthening to around 3 per cent in 2015 and 2016, a lower rate of growth than anticipated at the time of the April Report.
The recovery in the euro area remains modest and fragile.
Inflation has slowed and remains low, with concerns that it may fall further.
Nevertheless, accommodative monetary conditions, particularly in view of the ECB's recent measures, combined with receding domestic headwinds and strengthening external demand, are expected to support the recovery in the euro area.
Despite the progress to date, the path forward may be uneven, as some countries continue to rebalance their economies to improve their competitiveness.
Economic growth in China has continued to slow, reflecting the ongoing tension between rebalancing the economy and maintaining growth.
These strains are most evident in the property sector, which is entering its third cyclical downturn in six years, with both sales and housing starts contracting significantly at the start of 2014.
However, unlike in previous periods when policy was a key driver, the recent slowdown appears to reflect weakness in demand and excessive inventories.
Despite the downturn in the housing market, China's economic growth is expected to remain solid, supported by near-term targeted stimulus measures and ongoing medium-term economic reforms aimed at reorienting growth toward domestic consumption and away from investment and exports.
The risk remains that the housing downturn could accelerate, adversely affecting China's shadow banking sector, which could then have broader spillover effects on the banking sector, the real economy and, in turn, on global commodity prices.
In the rest of the world, growth is expected to pick up to roughly 3 3/4 per cent in 2015 and 2016.
The level of GDP is lower throughout the projection horizon, however, as a result of the weakness in the first quarter of this year.
Economic activity in the EMEs (excluding China) is expected to lead the pickup, growing by more than 4 per cent as foreign demand strengthens, recent improvements in financial conditions pass through to domestic credit conditions and progress is made on economic reforms.
Importantly, the emerging-market share of global GDP is expected to continue rising over the projection period, which, given their relatively higher commodity intensity, will support commodity prices.
Global crude oil prices have fluctuated in recent months, reflecting geopolitical developments.
By convention, for the purposes of the economic projection, the Bank assumes that energy prices will remain near their recent levels.
Prices for Brent, West Texas Intermediate and Western Canada Select have recently averaged roughly US$110, US$105 and US$85 per barrel, respectively.
Historical experience underscores the considerable uncertainty associated with crude oil prices.
In the near term, crude prices could surprise on the upside, since rising sectarian violence in Iraq could reduce global oil supplies, especially given OPEC's already low level of spare capacity.
In the medium term, however, the Bank's latest analysis of demand and supply factors suggests that the risks to oil prices are tilted to the downside.
In particular, if shale oil production were to exceed current estimates and/or geopolitical tensions were resolved, prices would likely fall below the level assumed in the Bank's base-case scenario.
Since the April Report, the prices of many non-energy commodities have risen.
In most cases, these increases are a reflection of supply developments rather than of a strengthening global economy.
The rise in agricultural prices has been driven by a surge in cattle prices, owing to extremely tight supplies, since US cattle stocks have fallen to the lowest level in more than five decades.
Lumber prices have recovered some of their previous decline as US housing construction bounced back from the effects of the severe winter, even though some previously unused production capacity has been coming on stream.
Meanwhile, the rise in base metals prices has been widespread and may be a sign of improving growth prospects.
However, supply-related issues, particularly the Indonesian ban on exports of metal ores, have also pushed up prices.
The prices of non-energy commodities are expected to rise as uncertainty wanes and the global economic expansion gains momentum.
The global economy has continued to disappoint, reflecting the pervasive uncertainty that continues to hold back activity, investment and trade.
Nevertheless, global economic growth is expected to strengthen as the underlying forces of natural growth gradually assert themselves, supporting Canadian exports, commodity prices and terms of trade.
Overall, however, the level of global economic activity is judged to be weaker over the projection horizon than anticipated in the April Report.
The Canadian dollar has averaged 93 cents since the June fixed announcement date, higher than the 91 cents assumed in April.
Total CPI inflation has moved up to around the 2 per cent target in recent months.
Core inflation has also increased, but remains below 2 per cent.
Although the Bank had anticipated in the April Report that higher consumer energy prices and exchange rate pass-through would exert temporary upward pressure on inflation, the increase occurred sooner and has been larger than anticipated.
The higher-than-expected inflation readings primarily reflect larger increases in energy prices, which are notoriously volatile, as well as other sector-specific factors that have temporarily affected core inflation.
The Bank's judgment is that underlying inflationary pressures remain muted, given the persistent slack in the economy and continued intense competition in the retail sector.
In light of the weaker global outlook, the Bank now estimates that it will take a little longer than expected in April for the Canadian economy to return to full capacity.
Inflation is expected to fluctuate close to 2 per cent over the next two years as the temporary boost to inflation from the relative price shocks noted above eases and the downward pressure on inflation arising from excess supply and heightened retail competition gradually dissipates.
As the economy reaches its full capacity around mid-2016, both core and total CPI inflation are projected to converge on 2 per cent on a sustained basis.
Canadian real GDP growth is projected to average around 2 1/4 per cent during 2014-16.
The abrupt slowing in global economic growth in the first quarter has once again delayed the expected pickup in exports and business investment.
However, the Bank continues to expect that the lower Canadian dollar and the projected strengthening of the global economy will lead to a broadening of the composition of growth in Canada.
Meanwhile, the Bank still anticipates a soft landing in the housing market and a continued constructive evolution of household imbalances.
Given the downgrade to the global economic outlook, economic activity in Canada is now projected to be a little weaker than previously expected.
Inflation has risen in recent months, owing to the temporary effects of higher energy prices and exchange rate pass-through, as well as certain other sector-specific shocks.
All of these factors are providing a one-time boost to the level of prices, which will drop out of the year-over-year inflation rate during 2015.
At the same time, persistent excess capacity in the economy and heightened competition in the retail sector are continuing to exert downward pressure on inflation.
The Bank estimates that these two factors are currently subtracting about 0.3 percentage points each from the annual rate of core inflation.
After fluctuating in a very narrow range around 1.2 per cent from January 2013 through March 2014, core inflation rose to an average of 1.6 per cent in April and May.
While monthly inflation has picked up markedly in the past six months, this is mainly the result of larger price increases in categories that are not believed to be affected by the degree of slack or competition in the Canadian economy.
For example, tight supply conditions in North America have caused meat prices to soar.
In addition, there has been a rapid rise in electricity rates (included in the core measure).
While there is obviously some uncertainty and there may be some upside risk to the near-term path, the Bank does not expect the recent momentum in monthly inflation to persist.
This is in part because the price increases in the sectors responsible for the pickup are currently above their historical averages and tend to exhibit low inflation persistence, suggesting that they will subside quickly going forward.
This is illustrated in Chart 12.The rise in total CPI inflation over the same period has been more pronounced than that of core inflation, owing to large increases in the prices for gasoline and natural gas.
Relative to the April Report, the higher-than-expected readings for core inflation mainly reflect larger increases in the prices for semi-durables, such as clothing and footwear, and food (in particular, meat).
In addition to higher core inflation, the positive shock to total CPI inflation reflects higher-than-expected gasoline prices.
The depreciation of the Canadian dollar since the beginning of 2013 has put some temporary upward pressure on inflation as higher import prices have been "passed through" to domestic consumer prices.
Both the magnitude and the timing of the direct impact of the exchange rate on core inflation are difficult to measure with precision.
The impact varies across businesses, depending on a number of factors, including import concentration and the duration of currency hedges.
The Bank's latest Business Outlook Survey suggests that some firms have already seen the effects of the exchange rate depreciation filter through to the cost of their inputs, while others expect to see these effects over coming quarters.
Over the past six months, core goods with higher import content - particularly clothing and footwear-have registered larger price increases than those with lower import content.
Past exchange rate declines appear to be adding about 0.1 to 0.2 percentage points to core inflation at this time.
Since some of the key volatile components excluded from the core measure are more sensitive to exchange rate movements, the pass-through to total CPI inflation is estimated to be larger, at about 0.3 to 0.4 percentage points.
In its base-case projection, the Bank assumes that the direct impact on the level of prices of the lower dollar will be complete by around the end of 2014.
As a result, the impact on year-over-year inflation should dissipate by the end of next year.
As reflected in the Bank's base-case scenario, for inflation to be sustained at 2 per cent, excess capacity in the economy will have to be absorbed.
Otherwise, inflation would drift back down and stay below 2 per cent.
Hampered by severe weather and supply constraints, real GDP in Canada grew at a modest pace in the first quarter.
With the reversal of these temporary effects, growth is expected to rebound in the second quarter, leaving real GDP at about the same level as projected in the April Report.
Taking into account the various indicators of capacity pressures and the uncertainty surrounding any point estimate, the Bank judges that the amount of excess capacity in the second quarter was between 1/2 per cent and 1 1/2 per cent.
Recent developments indicate that slack in the labour market is consistent with the material excess capacity in the economy.
Over the past year, employment has been very weak, increasing on average by roughly 6,000 jobs per month, or less than half the rate that would be consistent with real GDP growing at potential.
At around 7 per cent, the unemployment rate remains elevated and would have increased if not for the recent decline in the labour force participation rate of the prime-age group (25 to 54 years of age) from 86.6 per cent to 85.9 per cent over the past six months.
Such a decline in the participation rate is roughly equivalent to 100,000 fewer people.
In addition, in looking across various age groups, the participation rate of youth remains particularly low relative to its pre-recession peak.
For this group, the decline in the participation rate from 68.1 per cent to 63.5 per cent is roughly equivalent to 200,000 fewer youth participating in the labour force today.
For reference, the decline in the prime-age participation rate from its pre-recession peak of 86.7 per cent to 85.9 per cent is considerably smaller, but because this group has a larger population, it translates into a reduction in the labour force of about 120,000.
Continuing labour market slack is also reflected in subdued increases in wages.
Canadian exports of energy products increased further in the first quarter, while non-energy exports continued to disappoint, falling by more than the Bank's trade-weighted foreign activity measure.
However, non-energy exports appear to have rebounded sharply in the second quarter.
The Bank's outlook for exports balances these initial positive signs against the lower path of global activity over the projection horizon.
Overall, moderate export growth is expected as foreign activity strengthens and the competitiveness of Canadian firms benefits from a lower Canadian dollar.
Bank analysis has found that, in many non-energy subsectors (which account for about half of the value of non-energy exports), exports have been behaving broadly in line with, or better than, the indicators of foreign demand since 2000.
Therefore, as US activity strengthens - and with support from the lower exchange rate - these subsectors, including building and packaging materials, machinery and equipment, commercial services, and aircraft and aircraft parts, are expected to benefit.
In contrast, some sectors that have been facing longer-term challenges may need a lengthier adjustment period and more investment to regain productivity and competitiveness.
Healthy corporate balance sheets and the low cost and high availability of capital are providing solid support to firms.
The Bank's most recent Business Outlook and Senior Loan Officer surveys point to a further easing in credit conditions.
Business sentiment - particularly among exporters - is also showing tentative signs of improvement.
For example, the Conference Board of Canada's Index of Business Confidence edged up in the first quarter and remains above its historical average, and Export Development Canada's Trade Confidence Index has reached its highest level since spring 2010.
According to the Bank's summer Business Outlook Survey, firms' expectations for future sales growth remain positive, and there are indications of a gradual improvement in business sentiment regarding exports.
As well, the summer survey continues to point to an increase in business investment over the next 12 months, with a number of exporting firms looking to improve their competitiveness over the longer term.
Consistent with rising prices for non-energy commodities, Canada's terms of trade should improve further and provide additional support to business investment.
On balance, however, the growth profiles for exports and business investment have been revised down relative to the April Report as a result of the weaker level of activity in the global economy.
Energy exports are expected to outpace foreign activity, reflecting announced plans by major producers to increase output, the growing use of Canadian heavy oil in US refineries and additional rail transportation capacity.
The recovery in exports over the projection horizon will continue to be drawn out: the expected strong growth in energy exports and the return of growth to non-energy exports will not be sufficient to fill the shortfall left by the weak performance of non-energy exports relative to foreign activity since the end of 2011.
Recent developments in the housing market have been broadly consistent with a soft landing.
The trend in housing starts and building permits remains roughly in line with demographic demand.
Builders' inventories are showing signs of easing.
The recent pickup in construction reflects a rebound from weather-depressed levels in the first quarter and also indicates strong activity in Alberta.
While the weather likely explains most of the rebound in resale transactions in recent months, its magnitude and broad-based nature leave open the possibility of renewed momentum in the resale market.
In addition, existing home prices have continued to rise at a faster pace than disposable income.
Compared with a year ago, the growth in house prices has been particularly strong in Vancouver, Calgary and the Toronto region.
While there are risks in both directions, the Bank continues to expect that the level of residential investment will be relatively unchanged over the projection horizon and that its share of the overall economy will decline to a more sustainable level.
The Bank expects moderate growth in consumer spending over the projection horizon, broadly in line with the growth of household disposable income and supported by improvements in Canada's terms of trade.
Household credit is expected to continue growing at a rate well below its historical average, but at a pace similar to that of disposable income.
Consequently, the ratio of household debt to disposable income is expected to stabilize and the savings rate to remain within recent ranges.
While current developments are consistent with an ongoing constructive evolution of household imbalances, vulnerabilities in the household sector that stem from stretched valuations in the housing market and elevated indebtedness remain important.
The Bank's June Financial System Review provides a more in-depth assessment of these and other vulnerabilities.
For the inflation target to be achieved on a sustained basis, the economy will first have to reach and then remain at full capacity.
On a quarterly basis, real GDP growth is projected to average between 2 1/4 and 2 1/2 per cent in both 2014 and 2015, before easing to about 2 per cent - the growth rate of the economy's potential output - by the end of 2016.
The Bank expects that the economy will gradually return to its full production capacity over the next two years.
Given the degree of uncertainty inherent in projections, the Bank judges that annual GDP growth will likely be within 0.5 percentage points of the base-case projection.
In addition, there is always uncertainty surrounding the path of potential output growth.
In part, this is because potential output responds gradually to shifts in aggregate demand through changes in business investment, firm creation and labour force participation.
The path of core inflation will reflect the outcome of various factors at play.
The depreciation of the Canadian dollar over the past year and the effects of sector-specific shocks are expected to continue to put upward pressure on year-over-year core inflation until about the end of next year.
In contrast, excess capacity in the economy and heightened competition in the retail sector are anticipated to continue to exert downward pressure on core inflation - although at a diminishing rate - over most of the projection horizon.
As excess capacity in the economy is absorbed and the effects of heightened retail competition wane, core inflation is expected to stabilize at 2 per cent around mid-2016.
However, anecdotal evidence suggests that the intense competitive pressures have led retailers to increase their investment in technologies to improve productivity and reduce costs, putting downward pressure on retail prices.
If adoption of these technology improvements becomes more widespread, the disinflationary pressures could be larger or persist longer than currently assumed.
Total CPI inflation is forecast to remain slightly above core inflation through 2015, mainly reflecting higher energy prices.
There is, as always, much uncertainty about the profile of the total CPI, since it incorporates movements in volatile energy components.
For example, if the base-case scenario were to assume that oil prices were 10 per cent higher , total CPI inflation would be higher by 0.3 percentage points over the coming year.
Indicators of short-term inflation expectations are consistent with the Bank's projection.
According to the latest Business Outlook Survey, over 90 per cent of the firms surveyed expect inflation to be within the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range, with the majority expecting it to be in the bottom half of the range.
Firms cite retail competition and subdued economic growth as factors that are expected to keep inflation low.
With total CPI inflation now close to 2 per cent, the risk of a downward drift in inflation expectations has diminished.
Based on the past dispersion of private sector forecasts, a reasonable range around the base-case projection for total CPI inflation is 0.3 percentage points.
Fan charts, which are derived using statistical analysis of forecast errors from the Bank's projection models, provide a complementary perspective.
The most important risks to inflation are the following: The global economic outlook remains subject to a considerable degree of uncertainty.
The widespread weakness in the first quarter provided yet another example of disappointment regarding global growth outcomes.
Thus, a period of protracted global economic weakness associated with pervasive uncertainty, chronically deficient demand and weaker potential GDP growth remains possible.
Alternatively, as the global economy rebounds, confidence could improve more rapidly, particularly in the United States, boosting investment and employment and spurring trade, leading to a virtuous circle of self-sustaining growth.
These downside and upside risks to the global economy would be played out in parallel in Canada through impacts on commodity prices, Canadian exports, Canada's terms of trade and confidence effects on private domestic demand.
While a wide range of export sectors are expected to benefit from the continued strengthening of the US economy, a sustained rebound in non-energy exports has proven elusive.
The precise timing of the realignment in growth is highly uncertain and could take longer than anticipated by the Bank.
The risk of such a delay would be exacerbated if there were further losses of export competitiveness.
Growth in EMEs could disappoint.
In China, recent indicators point to a sharp slowdown in the housing sector.
Beyond the direct effects of lower housing activity, this could also result in a greater-than-anticipated slowdown in credit growth and an extended period of deleveraging that would weigh on growth.
There is also a risk that the weakness in other EMEs will persist longer than currently expected.
In particular, political uncertainty could continue, undermining business confidence and delaying progress on economic reforms.
Geopolitical events, such as the conflict in Iraq or a renewal of tensions in Libya, could lead to a significant supply disruption in oil markets.
An intensification of these conflicts, or other events that could disrupt production, would put upward pressure on prices.
If these events occurred, Canada's terms of trade would improve, providing modest support to wealth and consumer spending in Canada.
This mildly favourable effect would be partly offset, however, by any adverse effects on global economic growth from an oil price shock.
While a soft landing in the housing market remains the most likely scenario, near record-high house prices and debt levels relative to income leave households vulnerable to adverse shocks.
The recent rebound in housing activity is most likely only compensating for weakness in earlier months, but it could signal the beginning of a more persistent rise in housing activity and price pressures.
Renewed momentum in residential investment would provide a temporary boost to economic activity, although it could also further exacerbate existing imbalances in the household sector and increase the likelihood and potential severity of a correction later on.
A disorderly unwinding of household sector imbalances, should it materialize, could have sizable negative effects on other parts of the economy and on inflation.
The outlook for economic growth is diverging across regions and remains reliant upon exceptional monetary policy stimulus.
Private and public sector debt are now at even higher levels than before the global financial crisis, while weak global growth prospects have undermined debt-servicing capacity.
The resulting deleveraging continues to be an important headwind to global growth.
Another headwind is the low confidence in economic prospects, which has dampened business investment and world trade.
In this context, a substantial decline in oil prices, reflecting increased supply together with weaker demand prospects, has lowered the profile for Canada's terms of trade.
Despite these headwinds, as progress is made on deleveraging and confidence improves, global GDP growth is expected to pick up from about 3 per cent in 2014 to 3 1/2 per cent in 2015 and 2016.
This global profile is weaker than the projections in the July Monetary Policy Report.
In those advanced economies, such as the United States, where the policy response to the global financial crisis and subsequent recession was more aggressive and sustained, the recovery is more robust, as private deleveraging and fiscal consolidation are mainly complete.
In contrast, the recoveries in the euro area and Japan have lost momentum as those regions struggle to overcome persistent headwinds and structural impediments to growth.
Highly accommodative monetary policies are contributing to the economic recoveries in many countries and have underpinned developments in financial markets.
Long-term bond yields in North America have declined and in Japan are close to historical lows, as they were at the time of the July Report.
European bond yields have also declined to unusually low levels, in response to disappointing GDP growth, falling inflation expectations and further monetary easing .
Market sentiment has deteriorated in recent weeks, as evidenced by a repricing of riskier assets.
Even with this repricing, however, financial conditions remain accommodative.
Credit spreads, especially in the lower-rated credits, as well as bond spreads for emerging markets, have widened from their recent compressed levels, but remain tight by historical standards.
Although recent declines in global stock market indexes have erased all of this year's strong gains, there has still been a considerable reaccumulation of wealth over the post-crisis period.
While volatility has also risen across various markets from the subdued levels reached in the summer, it remains low by historical standards for most asset classes.
In light of the uneven global recovery, monetary policies may diverge further across regions in the period ahead.
After aggressively expanding its balance sheet, the US Federal Reserve is expected to announce the end of its asset purchases in October.
In contrast, the Bank of Japan is continuing to expand its balance sheet, and the European Central Bank undertook further actions in September to support economic growth in the euro area.
Market expectations for future policy rates imply different paths for monetary policy across regions.
The divergence in market-implied monetary policy paths and expected economic growth rates is, to some extent, contributing to the strength of the US dollar, which has appreciated since the July Report against a number of currencies, including the Canadian dollar.
Momentum in the US economy is strengthening.
Economic growth has rebounded from a negative first quarter as the effects of temporary and one-off factors-including a harsh winter, a marked drop in exports and a large inventory correction - were reversed.
Nonetheless, labour resources remain significantly underutilized and wage gains have been modest, suggesting that there is still a fair degree of slack in the economy.
Real GDP growth in the United States is projected to pick up in the second half of 2014 to average close to 3 per cent over 2015-16.
Based on the past dispersion of private sector forecasts, US economic growth in 2015 is anticipated to be within 0.5 percentage points of the Bank's projection, with a somewhat wider range in 2016.
For the first time since 2010, fiscal headwinds have abated.
Deleveraging by households and businesses appears to be largely complete.
Consumption growth is expected to be underpinned by gains in household wealth and employment, as well as by lower commodity prices.
Indeed, the lower assumed oil price (compared with the July Report) is estimated to raise the level of US GDP by 0.2 to 0.4 per cent over the projection horizon.
A sharp rise in mortgage rates in the middle of 2013 and the relatively weak rate of new household formation have resulted in disappointing housing activity over the past year.
However, ongoing improvements in the labour market and favourable demographics are expected to lead to a rebound in household formation, boosting residential construction in 2015-16.
As growth becomes self-sustaining, the output gap narrows and inflation pressures firm, the US economy is expected to gradually become less reliant on accommodative monetary policy.
In contrast to the situation in the United States, the recoveries in the euro area and Japan remain fragile as deleveraging, underlying structural deficiencies and labour market challenges continue to restrain growth.
Employment in both regions has yet to return to pre-crisis levels.
The recovery in the euro area stalled in the second quarter of 2014.
Substantial excess supply, slowing growth and persistently low inflation have led to a fall in inflation expectations, representing a significant downside risk to the modest recovery in the region.
Over the next two years, real GDP growth in the euro area is expected to average roughly 1 per cent.
The recovery will be supported by rising world demand, the ECB's recently announced policies, a relatively weak currency and ongoing structural reforms.
In Japan, growth fell sharply in the second quarter of this year.
While a decline was anticipated in the wake of an increase in its value-added tax in April, subsequent data suggest that the Japanese economy remains weaker than previously expected.
Despite considerable monetary accommodation, growth is expected to remain modest through 2016, as consumption demand continues to be restrained by weak real disposable household incomes and another VAT increase planned for 2015.
The depreciation of the yen is anticipated to lead to higher demand for domestically produced goods and an eventual improvement in Japan's external accounts.
Following a particularly weak first quarter, growth in China picked up strongly in the second and third quarters, largely because of an improvement in net exports.
The Bank expects real GDP growth in China to average around 7 per cent over 2014-16, supported by broadly accommodative monetary policy, targeted fiscal measures as authorities work to rebalance the economy, and lower oil prices.
However, activity in China's housing market continues to decelerate, with high and rising inventories and declining prices and sales.
Growth profiles have diverged across other major emerging-market economies.
The Bank projects that growth in EMEs will strengthen gradually through 2016 as financial conditions remain supportive and as several countries complete political transitions.
Reform-oriented governments are expected to implement structural changes that will remove impediments and encourage growth.
Despite rising geopolitical tensions, global crude oil prices have fallen since the July Report and are now at their lowest level in about four years.
The Bank estimates that about two-thirds of the decline is likely due to increased supply, particularly from Libya and from US shale oil production, with the remainder coming from weaker actual and anticipated global demand.
The price of Western Canada Select has declined by less than that of global crude, reflecting an increase in the capacity to transport oil out of Western Canada by rail and solid demand for heavy oil.
The US-dollar prices for Brent, West Texas Intermediate and WCS have recently averaged roughly $90, $85 and $70 per barrel, respectively.
These prices are $15 to $20 lower than had been assumed in the July Report.
The prospect of price competition among some major producers poses a downside risk.
That being said, the fiscal break-even oil price for OPEC members and high marginal supply costs for unconventional oil should provide a medium-term price floor of around $75 to $80 for Brent.
Despite the sharp fall in the spot price, the longer end of the futures curve has remained firm since the conflict in Iraq began in early June, reflecting market participants' concerns that events in Iraq could have a negative effect on supply over the longer term.
Agricultural prices are lower as a result of a record grain harvest and the smaller-than-expected impact on pork supplies of a virus affecting piglets.
Beef prices, however, remain elevated.
Base metals prices have fallen by about 6 per cent since the July Report, owing to concerns about prospects for demand from China.
Nevertheless, the prices of non-energy commodities remain roughly in line with levels at the beginning of the year, since increases in base metals and livestock prices (due to supply-side constraints) have been offset by a decline in lumber prices.
Non-energy commodity prices are expected to ease even further through early 2015 as a steady decline in the prices of agricultural products more than offsets an anticipated increase in prices for lumber and base metals.
Prices should begin to recover later on as the global economy gains strength.
Relative to the July Report, the profile for the Bank of Canada's commodity price index has fallen by more than 10 per cent.
Prices for energy and non-energy commodities are now lower by about 15 per cent and 5 per cent, respectively.
While the global outlook has been downgraded, growth is expected to gain momentum, in part because of solid growth in private sector demand in the United States.
Canada should benefit from the growing strength of its major trading partner.
As a result, Canada's terms of trade have also declined and are now projected to be about 6 per cent lower through 2015 and 2016 than was anticipated at the time of the July Report.
The Canadian dollar has depreciated since the July Report.
By convention, the Canadian dollar is assumed to remain at its recent average level of 89 cents over the projection horizon, lower than the 93 cents assumed in July.
Inflation in Canada is close to the 2 per cent target.
Core inflation rose more rapidly than anticipated in July, mainly reflecting unexpected sector-specific factors.
Meanwhile, total CPI inflation is evolving broadly as anticipated, as the pickup in core inflation was largely offset by lower-than-expected energy prices.
The Bank continues to judge that underlying inflationary pressures are muted, given the persistent slack in the economy and the continued effects of competition in the retail sector.
Economic activity in Canada is currently supported by the lower Canadian dollar and the ongoing low interest rates, which are continuing to help offset headwinds that include the impact of uncertainty and weak global demand.
Household spending still represents more than its long-run sustainable share of growth, and a rotation away from household spending toward business investment and exports is essential.
Exports have been gaining traction, in line with the growing momentum in the US economy, but investment remains weak.
Over time, as global headwinds recede, confidence in the sustainability of domestic and global demand should gradually improve, and the contribution of business investment should pick up.
Together with a moderation in the growth of household spending, this is expected to gradually return Canada's economy to a more balanced growth path.
Real GDP growth is projected to average close to 2 1/2 per cent over the next year before slowing gradually to around 2 per cent by the end of 2016, roughly the estimated growth rate of potential output.
The strengthening US economy and weaker Canadian dollar are providing support for Canada's non-energy exports.
However, the lower level of global crude oil prices and the resulting weaker terms of trade are projected to reduce Canadian incomes and to weigh on household and business spending.
As the economy reaches its full capacity in the second half of 2016, both core and total CPI inflation are projected to be about 2 per cent on a sustained basis.
Both core and total CPI inflation are now close to 2 per cent.
A significant portion of the rise in inflation since the beginning of the year reflects the temporary effects of exchange rate pass-through and other sector-specific factors.
The magnitude and timing of the direct impact of the exchange rate on core inflation are difficult to measure with precision.
The impact varies across businesses and depends on a number of factors, including the state of competition in individual sectors, the degree of import concentration and the duration of currency hedges.
Since the beginning of the year, core goods with higher import content - particularly clothing - have registered larger price increases than those with lower import content.
The depreciation of the Canadian dollar appears to be adding about 0.1 to 0.3 percentage points to core inflation at this point.
Since some of the key volatile components excluded from the core measure are more sensitive to exchange rate movements, the pass-through to total CPI inflation is estimated to be larger, at about 0.3 to 0.5 percentage points.
In the Bank's base-case projection, the direct effect of the lower dollar on the level of prices is assumed to be largely complete by around mid-2015.
As a result, the impact on year-over-year inflation should dissipate by mid-2016.
Sector-specific factors continue to provide temporary boosts to measured inflation.
Driven by telephone and Internet services, prices for communications registered one of the largest monthly gains on record in August.
On a year-over-year basis, prices were up 8.9 per cent in September, the highest rate of increase since the early 1980s.
Meat prices rose 11.5 per cent year-over-year in September, the highest rate since mid-1987.
Increases in meat prices are expected to moderate, since prices have risen by more than would be consistent with the typical pass-through from commodity prices, and hog prices have recently retreated somewhat.
More generally, above-average inflation since the beginning of the year has been concentrated in categories that tend to exhibit low inflation persistence - hence, inflation rates in these categories are expected to decrease in the near term.
Looking through these temporary effects, persistent excess capacity in the economy and heightened competition in the retail sector are continuing to exert downward pressure on inflation.
The Bank estimates that, together, these two factors are currently subtracting about half a percentage point from the annual rate of core inflation.
Alternative measures of core inflation have generally picked up since the beginning of the year.
The common component, which is well suited to seeing through one-off isolated price increases, has remained close to 1 1/2 per cent.
Stronger-than-expected growth in the second quarter of 2014 was partly offset by a downward revision to first-quarter growth.
Growth was boosted by the dissipation of temporary factors that had depressed activity earlier in the year and was underpinned by a surge in non-energy exports and solid household spending.
Real GDP in the third quarter is estimated to have increased by about 2 1/4 per cent to approximately the level that was anticipated in the July Report.
There is considerable uncertainty around estimates of economic slack.
While almost all indicators that the Bank monitors continue to point to excess capacity, they differ widely in the signals they provide on the magnitude of current slack.
The Bank uses three main approaches to assess overall production-based capacity pressures in the economy: the conventional measure, the integrated framework and the Business Outlook Survey.
The conventional measure suggests that there is currently a modest degree of slack in the economy, which reappeared after growth slowed in mid-2011.
In contrast, the integrated framework, which incorporates demographic details as well as macroeconomic data, suggests that excess capacity has fluctuated between 1 per cent and 2 per cent for more than three years.
Finally, responses to the Business Outlook Survey are interpreted to be consistent with persistent excess capacity since mid-2012.
As firms have been waiting for signs of a sustained strengthening in demand before expanding capacity, they have reported aligning operating capacity to weak market conditions and relying more heavily on existing capacity to meet fluctuations in demand.
Another way of assessing the slack in the economy is to separately examine unused capacity in the two main factors of production, i.e., labour input and capital.
In general, labour market indicators point to a larger degree of slack than production-based measures.
Using the integrated framework, we estimate, for example, that the labour input gap is currently around -1 3/4 per cent.
While the unemployment rate declined quite rapidly from late 2009 to late 2011, to about 7 per cent, and has remained fairly stable since then, it likely overstates the post-recession improvement in the labour market and the current degree of utilization of resources.
For one thing, the participation rate has fallen markedly in the past year - by roughly double what demographic shifts would suggest.
Notwithstanding the recent pickup in employment, total hours worked are essentially flat, and the share of full-time employment has been trending down.
As well, the elevated proportion of involuntary part-time workers (roughly 930,000 workers on average over the past year), the average duration of unemployment, and weak growth in unit labour costs all point to the persistence of significant excess supply.
A more comprehensive labour market indicator estimated by the Bank also suggests that the unemployment rate may have overstated the extent of improvements in labour markets.
There is less evidence of excess productive capital in the Canadian economy in the wake of a decade-long period of structural adjustment to competitiveness challenges punctuated by a global economic recession.
Over this extended period, the capital stock in Canada benefited from strong investment in the mining, oil and gas sector but also faced contractionary forces as some capacity in other sectors was permanently withdrawn from production, and there was limited investment in new capacity.
Faced with ongoing uncertainty about the outlook for global economic growth, firms have generally been reluctant to invest to expand capacity, focusing instead on investments to improve competitiveness or to repair existing capital stock.
As a result, capacity utilization has increased and is currently close to its historical average.
Taking into account the various indicators of capacity pressures and the uncertainty surrounding any point estimate, the Bank judges that the amount of excess capacity in the third quarter was between 1/2 and 1 1/2 per cent.
The level of economic activity and the corresponding degree of slack are influenced by many factors, including the stance of monetary policy.
With policy rates currently well below their estimated neutral levels in Canada and the United States, monetary policy in both countries remains highly stimulative.
This stimulus is needed to offset the considerable headwinds faced by both countries.
The Bank estimates that if the policy rate had been at its neutral level in both Canada and the United States since late 2010 and the Federal Reserve had not embarked on quantitative easing, the output gap in Canada would have been -5 1/2 per cent in the third quarter of this year.
With so much excess capacity in the economy, core inflation would have fallen to well below 1 per cent.
Housing and durables consumption, including auto sales, have benefited the most from this policy stimulus, with the latter estimated to be about 280,000 vehicles higher in 2014 than if the policy rate were at neutral in Canada and the United States.
Canadian exports have also benefited indirectly through the impact of lower US interest rates on US consumption and investment spending.
The Bank's estimate of the neutral rate is subject to considerable uncertainty.
A neutral rate different than the one currently assumed by the Bank would affect the outlook for economic activity and inflation.
A lower level for the neutral rate would imply less policy stimulus than currently assumed and a risk of inflation not returning to target on a sustainable basis over the projection horizon.
Symmetrically, a higher neutral rate would risk an overshoot of the target.
Recent data point to a further gain in exports in the third quarter.
The pickup in exports has been fairly broad-based across sectors, with additional gains in energy and solid growth in exports of non-energy goods.
Part of the growth in non-energy components (e.g., passenger cars and light trucks, motor vehicle parts, and intermediate food products) reflects a rebound from a very weak first quarter.
However, there is now evidence of more sustained growth in several other components, including machinery and equipment, fabricated metal products, and building and packaging materials.
The Bank expects export growth to continue as foreign activity strengthens and the competitiveness of Canadian firms benefits from a lower Canadian dollar.
The level of exports is higher than projected in July, consistent with the increased levels observed recently and the higher projected level for US activity through next year.
This view is also supported by the results of the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey, which indicate that exporters have seen more tangible signs of improving sales growth and are anticipating an acceleration of foreign sales.
Nevertheless, the export profile is still much weaker than in previous cycles, and downside risks remain.
To a large extent, the export profile reflects the weakness of the global recovery.
But, as the Bank emphasized in previous Reports, it also reflects competitiveness challenges and structural issues.
It suggests that capacity in a number of sectors has declined significantly since 2000.
Within the broad export categories identified as underperforming relative to others (16 of the 31 non-energy export categories), about one-quarter of the subsectors (about 500 out of 2,000) have registered export declines of more than 75 per cent since 2000.
More than one-third of this decrease is accounted for by a decline in exports of heavy trucks.
Other subsectors with notable declines include rail locomotives, wooden furniture, knitted fabrics, small passenger cars and kraftliner paper.
Anecdotal evidence, including numerous media reports of production facility closures, suggests that those declines reflect structural or competitiveness issues, and therefore represent lost productive capacity.
When compared with a scenario in which exports of these products would have risen in line with foreign activity, there is a gap equivalent to about $30 billion (in real terms) by 2013, or a 7 per cent reduction in total non-energy exports in 2013.
The weakness in these sectors can also explain almost 40 per cent of the poor performance of non-energy exports relative to foreign activity since 2000.
While an increasing number of export sectors appear to be turning the corner toward recovery, only when this pickup is perceived as sustainable will it translate into the higher business spending required to return the economy to sustainable, balanced growth.
At the same time, there are downside risks related to the possibility of persistently weaker commodity prices, which could weigh on investment in the mining, oil and gas sector.
Other factors are generally positive for investment spending: corporate balance sheets are healthy, and the terms and conditions for financing are very stimulative.
In addition, as time passes there will be a natural increase in investment to repair and replenish aging capital stock.
There is no evidence yet, however, of a pickup in firm creation.
Responses to the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey show that the balance of opinion on investment intentions has remained relatively high, but this is not expected to immediately translate into a large increase in investment growth.
Although, on balance, firms are planning to invest in machinery and equipment, few are planning significant investments to enhance capacity in Canada.
Analysis by Bank staff suggests that most sectors expected to lead the recovery in non-energy exports currently have sufficient excess capacity to meet demand.
These sectors include manufacturers of intermediate metal products, fabricated metals, non-metallic mineral products, as well as other electronic and electrical machinery, equipment and parts.
A notable exception is the wood products sector, which is currently operating at a capacity utilization rate well above its historical average.
Momentum in the housing market has increased since the July Report.
Housing activity has been more robust than anticipated, buoyed by continued very low mortgage rates and exhibiting strength beyond a rebound from weather-depressed levels earlier in the year.
Housing starts have remained broadly in line with demographic demand in recent months.
However, sales of existing homes have picked up noticeably since the beginning of the year, to a four-year high.
This is contributing to sizable increases in house prices, although the national picture continues to mask important regional divergences.
In general, with historically low price increases and sales volumes, markets in Eastern Canada appear to show signs consistent with a soft landing.
This contrasts with major cities in Ontario, Alberta and British Columbia, where housing markets are generally robust and much tighter.
While a good part of the strength can be explained by favourable demographics and strong employment gains in parts of the country, it nonetheless suggests that household imbalances could increase further.
Consumer spending has also shown some renewed vigour recently, with car sales in particular reaching record highs.
The strength in both housing and consumption has led to an uptick in the growth of household credit.
The Bank continues to expect that the share of residential investment in the economy will decline to a more sustainable level over the projection period.
The declines in commodity prices and the terms of trade are expected to weigh on household income and contribute to a modest slowing in household spending.
The ratio of household debt to disposable income is expected to edge higher from its current elevated level before stabilizing by 2016.
However, this outlook for housing and the household sector depends on other aspects of the projection, such as a more robust global economy, stronger growth of Canadian exports and investment, and the beginning of a normalization of global market interest rates.
While the lower Canadian dollar will provide some offset, on net, the Bank estimates that the weaker profile for the terms of trade in this projection compared with July will curb GDP growth by approximately 1/4 of a percentage point in 2015 through a combination of weaker spending by households and businesses.
The Bank expects that the economy will gradually return to its full production capacity in the second half of 2016.
Given the degree of uncertainty inherent in projections, the Bank judges that GDP growth will likely be within 0.5 percentage points of the base-case projection in 2015, with a somewhat wider range in 2016.
The growth of potential output is projected to remain roughly stable over the 2014-17 period.
While demographic factors, mainly the aging population, result in a moderation in the growth rate of trend labour input, the impact on potential growth is projected to be largely offset by a modest improvement in the growth of trend labour productivity associated with the expected firming in business investment growth.
Core inflation is expected to remain around 2 per cent over the projection horizon.
The depreciation of the Canadian dollar over the past two years or so and the effects of sector-specific shocks are expected to continue to put upward pressure on year-over-year inflation until about mid-2016.
Offsetting these effects, excess capacity in the economy and the effects of competition in the retail sector are anticipated to continue to exert downward pressure on core inflation, although at a diminishing rate.
It is difficult to be precise about the size of the competition effects on the CPI and the timing of their dissipation.
In the second half of 2016, when the economy is forecast to reach and remain at full capacity, inflation is expected to be about 2 per cent on a sustained basis.
As discussed earlier, there is considerable uncertainty regarding the degree of slack in the economy, including uncertainty related to the dynamics of the labour gap relative to the output gap.
Therefore, there is uncertainty about how long it will take for the economy to reach full potential and for inflation to return sustainably to target.
For example, using the lower end of the range for the output gap in the third quarter (-1 1/2 per cent), the Bank estimates that core inflation would decline to about 1 1/2 per cent in the second half of 2015, or 0.2 percentage points lower than in the base-case projection, assuming no monetary policy response.
Inflation would also take approximately three quarters longer to return sustainably to target.
Conversely, a starting-point output gap of -1/2 per cent would push inflation about 0.2 percentage points above the base-case projection in 2015.
Total CPI inflation is forecast to remain close to 2 per cent in the near term and to decline to about 1 1/2 per cent in mid-2015, mainly in response to the recent fall in energy prices.
Total CPI inflation is then expected to rise gradually and to return to target in the second half of 2016.
As always, the profile for total CPI inflation can vary importantly, depending on movements in volatile energy components.
For example, if the base-case scenario assumed that oil prices were 10 per cent higher , total CPI inflation would be higher by 0.3 percentage points over the coming year.
Inflation expectations remain well anchored: the October Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation was 2.0 per cent in 2014 and 1.9 per cent in 2015.
The results of the autumn Business Outlook Survey suggest that the vast majority of firms still expect inflation over the next two years to be within the 1 to 3 per cent range, with the central tendency slightly below 2 per cent.
Fan charts, which are derived using statistical analysis of the Bank's forecast errors, provide a complementary perspective.
Chart 29 and Chart 30 show the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation, respectively, from the fourth quarter of 2014 to the end of 2016.
The most important risks to inflation are the following: Stronger-than-expected private demand in the United States is the most important upside risk to inflation in Canada.
With healthy corporate balance sheets and good profitability, a rekindling of animal spirits could lead businesses to increase hiring and investment by more than expected.
These improvements would boost confidence and lead to stronger labour income, supporting household spending and economic activity more generally.
Higher commodity prices would benefit commodity producers and provide a further boost to Canadian private spending through stronger terms of trade and income.
There is a risk that global economic growth could once again disappoint, remaining below potential over 2015-16.
There are a number of possible triggers for this risk, including the realization of secular stagnation, a housing-induced slowdown and financial stress in China, and a geopolitical event that impairs global confidence.
If any one of these risks were to materialize, it would weigh on US and Canadian economic growth through trade, financial and confidence channels, reducing external demand for Canadian exports and lowering Canada's terms of trade.
Global oil prices have fallen sharply since the July Report, reflecting concerns about global demand as well as important supply-side developments.
There is a risk that oil prices could fall further, especially if global growth prospects continue to weaken.
While lower oil prices would benefit consumers, their effect on Canada would, on balance, be negative, reducing Canada's terms of trade and domestic income.
Persistently lower-than-assumed oil prices could also have a material impact on investment and activity in the oil sector and the associated manufacturing supply chain.
Recent data suggest that a broad-based pickup in exports is under way, in line with a continued strengthening of the US economy and the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar.
However, for a given global outlook, there remains a risk that exports could disappoint.
Recent Bank analysis suggests that production capacity in a number of export sectors has declined significantly since 2000 as companies have closed their facilities in Canada and relocated.
Reduced capacity could limit the extent to which non-energy exports continue to benefit from stronger external demand over the medium term.
At the same time, business investment growth has yet to mirror the pickup in exports.
While the Bank continues to expect investment to gain momentum as economic uncertainty dissipates, the realization of a downside risk to exports would also jeopardize the recovery in investment growth.
Household spending has shown signs of renewed vigour in recent months.
While a soft landing in the housing market remains the most likely scenario, near-record-high house prices and debt levels relative to income leave households vulnerable to adverse shocks.
Continued strength in housing and consumption would provide a near-term boost to economic activity, but would also further exacerbate existing imbalances in the household sector and increase the likelihood and potential severity of a correction later on.
A disorderly unwinding of these imbalances, should it materialize, could have sizable negative effects on other parts of the economy and on inflation.
Oil prices have plummeted over the past six months.
Lower oil prices are expected to boost global economic growth while widening the divergences among economies.
These developments are taking place against the backdrop of a modest pickup in global growth, as headwinds from ongoing deleveraging and lingering uncertainty gradually abate.
Within this mixed global picture, the main area of strength is the United States, Canada's largest trading partner.
Economic growth in the United States is expected to become increasingly self-sustaining, further propelled by the large positive impact from oil-price declines, despite the drag from the appreciation of the US dollar.
In other advanced economies, particularly the euro area and Japan, growth is expected to remain weak despite additional policy stimulus, as the headwinds from deleveraging and uncertainty dissipate gradually.
Those headwinds are also expected to temper the positive effects of lower oil prices on advanced economies.
In the rest of the world, GDP growth is expected to be held back by the negative effects of lower oil prices on oil-exporting countries; however, growth should strengthen gradually through 2016 as foreign demand in advanced economies picks up and growth-enhancing structural reforms are implemented.
Taking these various countervailing factors into account, the Bank anticipates a pickup in global economic growth to about 3 1/2 per cent over the next two years, a similar growth profile to that presented in the October 2014 Monetary Policy Report.
Global crude oil prices have fallen by more than 40 per cent since the October Report and by more than 55 per cent since their recent peak in June 2014.
Until mid-2014, oil prices were fairly stable, since the unexpectedly rapid increase in North American production, especially from US shale oil, was roughly offset by unplanned outages elsewhere in the world.
In the second half of 2014, however, some of these outages ended, while the supply of US shale oil continued to grow.
These forces have driven global oil prices down to their lowest level in more than five years.
The prices for Brent, West Texas Intermediate and Western Canada Select in US dollars have averaged roughly $60, $55 and $40, respectively, since early December.
The near-term risks to the assumption for oil prices are skewed to the downside.
Prevailing prices are weaker than the Bank's base-case assumption, and production growth could remain strong over the coming months, owing to past investment and hedging, as well as ongoing price competition for market share among the major producers.
Global oil demand is typically low in the winter months, and could also continue to disappoint in the context of moderate global economic growth.
Given structural changes in the oil market, particularly as a result of the US shale supply, there is much uncertainty regarding future prices.
This, in turn, reflects uncertainty about the impact of further technological advances, demand and the cost of capital.
Most of the upside risks are supply-driven.
Based on recent estimates of production costs, roughly one-third of current production could be uneconomical if prices stay around US$60, notably high-cost production in the United States, Canada, Brazil and Mexico.
More than two-thirds of the expected increase in the world oil supply would similarly be uneconomical.
A decline in private and public investment in high-cost projects could significantly reduce future growth in the oil supply, and the members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries would have limited spare capacity to replace a significant decrease in the non-OPEC supply.
Prices could also rise if OPEC decides to lower its production level.
Lastly, geopolitical issues are perennial sources of volatility in oil prices, and supply disruptions can emerge at any time.
On the downside, further technological advances and cost-cutting measures by oil-producing firms could lower their costs of production, thereby reducing the break-even costs of some energy projects.
More fundamentally, the structure of the global oil market and the behaviour of producers may change from what has been observed over the past several decades.
In addition, ongoing innovation to improve energy efficiency and environmental regulations could dampen the demand for oil.
Overall, the Bank views the risks to the US$60 price assumption to be tilted to the upside over the medium term.
Prices for non-energy commodities have softened modestly, on average, since the October Report, with a pickup in grain prices mostly offsetting lower prices for other commodities.
Prices for base metals such as copper and iron ore have declined further since October, with demand growth from China continuing to moderate as the authorities work to rebalance their economy.
These price movements have generally been less pronounced than those observed in oil markets, however, suggesting that recent shifts in global demand are not the driving force behind the large movements in oil prices.
Lumber prices have also eased somewhat, as is typical during the winter months when construction activity slows.
Overall, prices for non-energy commodities are expected to remain subdued through the first half of 2015 and then gradually rise as the global economy gains strength.
Still, owing to the sharp downward revision to the outlook for oil prices, the Bank's commodity price index is about 20 per cent lower than in the October Report.
Lower oil prices act as a tax cut for consumers and firms by reducing the prices of transportation and other petroleum-related goods and services.
As a result, they are, on net, positive for global economic growth.
However, the impact of lower oil prices is, of course, quite different for net oil exporters than for net oil-importing countries.
For a large number of advanced economies, as well as China and other oil importing emerging-market economies , the drop in oil prices boosts GDP growth because of an improvement in their terms of trade, gains in real disposable income for consumers and a reduction in business costs.
In the current economic context, however, the Bank expects that persistent headwinds and other mitigating factors will influence the extent to which some oil-importing countries benefit from lower prices.
As a result, the drop in oil prices is expected to be a more modest boon to growth compared with past experience.
Lingering uncertainty and ongoing deleveraging will lead some consumers to use the gains in disposable income to pay down debt rather than increase their spending.
In China, the near-term impact of lower oil prices on GDP may be offset by a reduction in policy stimulus.
Weaker oil prices would allow Chinese authorities to reduce policy support for growth, while also facilitating further reforms that will help rebalance the economy and mitigate risks in the financial sector.
Falling oil prices are a net negative for oil-exporting countries because they cause a deterioration in their terms of trade and weaken investment and government revenues.
However, lower oil prices also put downward pressure on the currencies of oil exporters, which helps to cushion the negative impact on their economies.
In some EME oil exporters, the large decline in oil prices has spurred significant financial market turmoil, which has led to capital outflows, large increases in sovereign spreads, and significant currency depreciation and volatility in foreign exchange markets.
This turmoil has been particularly acute in Russia, where low oil prices have compounded existing challenges from economic sanctions.
There is a risk that financial market turbulence could spread to other oil-exporting nations and even to other EMEs, dampening their prospects for economic growth.
The decline in oil prices will push down total inflation everywhere, against a backdrop of persistent global excess capacity and subdued inflationary pressures.
The impact on inflation is especially important for the euro area, where headline inflation has fallen below zero, increasing the risk that inflation expectations could become de-anchored.
Although activity continues to rely on ongoing accommodative monetary policy, fundamentals are improving and should lead to further growth in US private domestic demand.
Stronger business investment is indicative of improved confidence.
Credit conditions, other than for housing (for example, for auto financing), have eased considerably.
Moreover, in 2015, government spending is expected to resume growing on an annual basis for the first time in five years.
The US labour market has improved.
Job gains have averaged close to 250,000 per month through 2014; the unemployment rate has fallen; and other labour market indicators, including the Bank's labour market indicator for the United States, have improved.
The decline in oil prices will provide a further boost to economic activity.
The estimated impact of a decline in oil prices from the June 2014 level of about US$110 to the base-case assumption of US$60 would be to raise the level of US GDP by about 1 per cent by the end of 2016.
Overall, the combination of the recent stronger-than-expected US growth and lower oil prices, partially offset by the appreciation of the US dollar over recent months, results in a more positive outlook for the US economy than anticipated in the October Report.
In the euro area and Japan, economic growth has faltered, prompting additional policy stimulus and the expectation of further action.
While both economies will benefit from lower oil prices and exchange rate depreciation, these effects will be tempered by the weak and uncertain economic environment.
In Japan, a surprisingly weak third quarter prompted the Bank of Japan to step up quantitative easing, and the government to postpone the planned sales tax hike and introduce further fiscal stimulus.
Reflecting these measures, as well as lower oil prices and a weaker yen, the outlook for economic growth in Japan in 2016 has been revised upward, although it remains modest.
Reflecting these developments, the monetary policies of the major advanced economies are expected to follow increasingly divergent paths.
Markets expect the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan to be implementing unconventional policies for an extended period.
This contrasts with the expectation that the US Federal Reserve will begin normalizing monetary policy in 2015 as the US economy continues to strengthen.
These anticipated differences in policy paths have put additional downward pressure on major currencies against the US dollar.
For example, the euro and the yen have fallen by roughly 10 per cent against the US dollar since the October Report.
The expectation of low inflation and further monetary policy measures in some advanced economies, together with increased demand for safe assets (owing to geopolitical, macroeconomic and oil-price uncertainty), has pushed yields on long-term government bonds in advanced economies down further since October to new record lows in many countries.
Since October, the Canadian dollar has depreciated against the US dollar, reflecting the drop in oil prices and the widespread strength of the US currency, but is little changed against the currencies of Canada's other major trading partners.
By convention, the Canadian dollar is assumed to be close to its recent average level of 86 cents over the projection horizon, compared with 89 cents assumed in October.
Core inflation has been temporarily boosted by some sector-specific factors and the pass-through effects of the depreciation in the Canadian dollar, which provide an offset to disinflationary pressures from slack in the economy and the effects of competition in the retail sector.
Total CPI inflation softened noticeably in November, reflecting lower energy prices, and will fall substantially further in coming months.
The large decline in oil prices will weigh significantly on the Canadian economy.
While real GDP growth has been solid and more broadly based in recent quarters, near-term growth is expected to slow as investment in the energy sector responds rapidly to lower oil prices.
In addition, Canada's weakening terms of trade will have an adverse impact on income and wealth, with implications for consumption and public finances.
The negative impact of lower oil prices will be gradually mitigated by stronger US growth, the weaker Canadian dollar and the beneficial impact of lower oil prices on global economic growth.
Given the speed and magnitude of the oil price decline, there is substantial uncertainty around the likely level for oil prices and their impact on the economic outlook for Canada.
Bearing in mind this uncertainty, in its base-case projection, the Bank expects that in the first half of this year real GDP growth will slow to about 1 1/2 per cent and the degree of excess capacity will widen somewhat.
The Bank expects the economy to gradually strengthen, starting in the second half of 2015, with the output gap closing around the end of 2016, a little later than was expected in October.
Relative to October, the year-over-year growth rate for real GDP in the fourth quarter of 2015 has been revised down by 0.5 percentage points to 1.9 per cent.
While total CPI inflation is projected to fall as a result of the drop in energy prices, and to be temporarily below the inflation-control range during 2015, the Bank anticipates that total CPI inflation will move back up to target the following year.
Core inflation is expected to soften in the near term and remain close to 2 per cent over the projection horizon.
Both total CPI and core inflation have hovered near 2 per cent in recent quarters, about 1 percentage point higher than a year earlier.
The increase in core inflation over the past year is largely due to some sector-specific factors and the temporary effects of a lower Canadian dollar.
Even without these factors, there has been a small upward drift in underlying inflation, consistent with the recent trend shown by alternative measures of core inflation.
Sector-specific factors are temporarily raising core inflation by about 0.3 percentage points.
Of these factors, the most important are meat and communications prices, which are boosting core inflation by a combined 0.4 percentage points relative to their historical average contribution.
Continued supply constraints for cattle have prevented inflation in meat prices from abating.
On the other hand, travel tours prices declined sharply in November, dampening core inflation by about 0.1 percentage point.
The effect of the pass-through from exchange rate depreciation is estimated to be currently raising core inflation by about 0.2 to 0.3 percentage points.
The impact from pass-through is difficult to estimate precisely, for at least two reasons.
First, hedging has insulated some prices from immediately showing the full impact of currency movements.
Second, it is not easy to separate the impact on prices of pass-through from the effects of retail competition, since both factors tend to affect the same categories of goods with high import content.
Nevertheless, a comparison of price developments in Canada with those in the United States supports our assessment of the effects of pass-through.
Retail competition and continued slack in the economy are having a dampening effect on core inflation.
The Bank estimates that core inflation would be about 0.3 - 0.4 percentage points higher without their combined effects.
Total CPI inflation in the fourth quarter of 2014 is estimated to have been 0.2 percentage points lower than expected in October.
The downward revision is due to the weaker-than-anticipated energy prices associated with the drop in oil prices.
Real GDP grew more rapidly in the third quarter than anticipated in October, driven by further solid gains in household spending and exports, and a rebound in business investment.
The net effect of recent stronger-than-expected growth, together with significant upward revisions to historical data going back to 2011, is that the levels of real GDP and potential output in the fourth quarter of 2014 are now estimated to be 0.9 and 0.7 per cent higher, respectively, than assumed in October.
The three main indicators that the Bank uses to assess overall pressures on production-based capacity in the economy continue to indicate some excess capacity but provide different signals as to its magnitude.
Both the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey and the statistical measure of the output gap suggest that the gap is quite small, while the structural estimate of the output gap suggests that the gap is larger, on the order of about 1 per cent.
Many labour market indicators point to significant slack in the economy.
For example, the structural estimate of the labour input gap is currently around -1 1/2 per cent.
The Bank's comprehensive measure of labour market performance (the LMI) continues to fluctuate in the range observed over the past several years, suggesting both more labour market slack and less improvement in labour market conditions than indicated by the unemployment rate.
Relative to the unemployment rate, improvement in the LMI has been held back by other labour market developments: long-term unemployment is still close to its post-crisis peak, average hours worked remain low, and the proportion of involuntary part-time workers continues to be elevated.
In another sign of ongoing labour market challenges, the participation rate is low relative to what would be suggested by purely demographic forces.
Wage increases are moderate, with pressures on inflation dampened by the robust pickup in labour productivity during 2014.
Measures of the utilization of the existing capital stock are less indicative of excess capacity, as would be expected, given the destructive forces that accompany a longer and more persistent recession such as the recent global recession.
Capacity utilization in the manufacturing sector increased further in the third quarter, to about 84 per cent, above its long-term average of about 81 per cent.
This elevated level of utilization follows a challenging period of adjustment for the sector, and is consistent with the manufacturing sector entering a rebuilding phase.
Responses to the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey indicate that firms benefiting from strengthening US demand and improvements in exports have started to feel some pressures on their capacity.
For example, over the past year, a growing share of exporters have cited physical capacity constraints as an obstacle to meeting a sudden increase in demand or sales.
Taking into account the various indicators of capacity pressures and the uncertainty surrounding any point estimate, the Bank judges that the amount of excess capacity in the fourth quarter was between 1/4 and 1 1/4 per cent.
This range suggests about 1/4 of a percentage point less excess capacity than was estimated in October for the third quarter.
The considerably lower profile for oil prices will be unambiguously negative for the Canadian economy in 2015 and subsequent years.
In the near term, real GDP growth is expected to slow to below the growth rate of potential output, and the unemployment rate is expected to rise as investment in the energy sector rapidly contracts in response to lower oil prices and as housing market activity in energy-intensive regions slows.
Growth in the first half of 2015 is anticipated to average about 1 1/2 per cent, considerably weaker than the growth rate of about 2 1/2 per cent expected in October.
To illustrate the degree of uncertainty in the base case associated with the Bank's assumption for the price of oil, if oil prices were to remain around US$50 (rather than US$60, as assumed), real GDP growth would fall to about 1 1/4 per cent in the first half of 2015.
By the end of the year, the output gap would widen by roughly an additional 1/4 percentage point.
Lower oil prices reverse roughly one-third of the income gains associated with the improvement in Canada's terms of trade since 2002, which will weigh on consumption and public finances over the projection horizon.
The negative impacts of weaker oil prices for the Canadian economy will be gradually offset over the projection horizon by other effects of the price change, including the net positive impact on the global economy, and especially on the United States, and the depreciation of the Canadian dollar.
Real GDP growth is expected to pick up to about 2 1/4 per cent in the second half of 2015 and to strengthen further to about 2 1/2 per cent, on average, in 2016.
The Bank expects that the economy will reach full capacity around the end of 2016, a little later than had been predicted in October.
While the net impact of lower oil prices on the Canadian economy is negative, the effects across regions and sectors are expected to vary significantly.
Lower oil prices will curtail business investment in energy-related industries, restrain housing activity in energy-intensive regions and provide some incentives for households whose incomes rely on the oil sector to build precautionary savings.
In contrast, the manufacturing sector will benefit from stronger demand in the United States, lower shipping costs and the weaker Canadian dollar.
If the recent decline in oil prices proves durable, there could be a persistent shift of investment and jobs away from energy-related sectors and regions, thereby reversing some earlier structural adjustment in Canada's economy.
The Bank's latest Business Outlook Survey provides information about the early responses of firms to this shock.
The balances of opinion on future sales growth, hiring and capital spending intentions are all lower than in the previous survey.
Businesses also report a higher level of uncertainty about the economy.
On the other hand, sentiment in the export sector has continued to improve, with manufacturers now more positive than other sectors regarding investment intentions and employment.
While business investment had been showing some encouraging signs in the third quarter of 2014, the near-term outlook appears much less positive.
The most important near-term impact of the lower oil prices on Canadian real GDP is expected to be from lower investment in the oil and gas sector, which is now projected to fall by roughly 30 per cent in 2015 and remain broadly unchanged in 2016.
Interviews with energy firms conducted by Bank staff in November and December 2014 suggest a relatively quick investment response to lower oil prices, with firms already scaling back projects planned for 2015.
Oil prices are now lower than current full-cycle break-even costs for many projects.
Financing constraints also appear to be playing an important role.
The negative consequences of the oil-price shock are also likely to feed through to firms that provide support to the oil sector, including rail transportation.
With lower oil prices, the growth rates of Canadian energy production and exports are expected to slow.
Energy exports are now projected to grow at an annual average rate of about 1 per cent, compared with about 6 per cent in 2014.
Exports of non-energy goods rebounded in 2014, with continued strong growth in the third quarter of 2014.
Growth in non-energy exports has been particularly evident in categories that are more sensitive to the exchange rate.
The recovery in non-energy exports is expected to continue over the projection horizon, with exports stimulated by the lower Canadian dollar and stronger foreign activity.
Outside the energy sector, there are signs that the hoped for sequence of increased foreign demand, stronger exports, improved business confidence and investment, and employment growth is progressing.
Some industries, such as transportation and manufacturing, will benefit from lower oil prices through lower input costs, which could stimulate some additional investment.
Moreover, business fixed investment outside the oil and gas sector is expected to strengthen as the pickup in non-energy exports is increasingly perceived as sustainable.
However, there is considerable uncertainty about the speed with which this sequence will evolve and also about how the drop in oil prices could affect that process.
Household spending remained strong in the third quarter of 2014, with further solid gains in motor vehicle sales and robust housing activity.
Over the projection horizon, consumption growth is expected to slow as the negative terms-of-trade shock from lower oil prices leads to higher unemployment and restrains income growth and wealth.
In the near term, households will have money saved on energy purchases to reallocate.
With increased risks of layoffs, those households whose incomes rely on the oil sector will have greater incentives to build precautionary savings or pay down debt.
The oil-price shock will also affect housing activity in energy-intensive regions.
Near-term housing activity elsewhere is expected to remain high, supported by very low mortgage rates, although the extent to which the downturn already evident in Alberta will spill over into other regions remains to be seen.
On the whole, residential investment as a share of GDP is expected to decline gradually over the projection horizon.
Household imbalances remain elevated and are expected to edge up in the near term, given the continued strength of house prices and resale activity in some regions.
Energy-intensive regions will be more susceptible to declining house prices and rising unemployment rates, which would increase financial sector vulnerabilities.
Overall, the ramifications of the oil price shock for household imbalances will depend importantly on the impact of the shock on income and employment.
Lower oil prices will also have significant implications for public finances, notably for oil-producing provinces.
The government spending assumptions contained in this base case are broadly unchanged from October and reflect already announced fiscal measures, as is the Bank's convention.
Core inflation is expected to ease through the middle of 2015 as the temporary boost to inflation from sector-specific factors falls out of the inflation data.
Thereafter, core inflation is expected to remain fairly steady, at close to 2 per cent, as the downward pressure arising from excess supply and retail competition gradually dissipates and the upward pressure from the pass-through of the depreciation of the dollar fades.
Based on the assumption of oil prices at US$60, total CPI inflation is projected to fall sharply and to be below the inflation-control range during 2015.
Given the magnitude of the shock to oil prices, there is an exceptional amount of uncertainty about the profile for total CPI.
As the economy reaches and remains at full capacity by around the end of 2016, both core and total CPI are projected to be about 2 per cent on a sustained basis.
Short-term expectations for total CPI inflation have been revised down considerably, but medium-term expectations remain well anchored.
Compared with October, the January Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation for 2015 declined by 0.8 percentage points to 1.1 per cent.
Results of the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey show that the majority of firms still expect inflation over the next two years to be within the 1 to 3 per cent range, with a shift toward the bottom half of the range.
The Bank judges that the risks to the projected path for inflation are roughly balanced.
Recent momentum, combined with the boost from lower oil prices, could spur even stronger activity, rekindling animal spirits in the United States.
In turn, businesses would increase hiring and investment by more than expected, providing further support for household spending and economic activity more generally.
Oil prices have fallen sharply since mid-2014, reflecting important supply-side developments and lower growth in global demand.
There is a risk that oil prices could fall further if major oil producers continue to expand supply in a context of moderate global economic growth.
On the other hand, oil prices could move higher if material outages reappear or if declining investment by higher-cost producers squeezes supply sooner than expected.
While lower oil prices would benefit consumers, the effect on Canada would, on balance, be negative, reducing Canada's terms of trade and domestic income.
A rise in oil prices would mitigate some of the negative impacts that have already occurred.
There is a risk that growth in China and other emerging-market economies could be much slower than expected.
There are a number of possible triggers for this risk, including a housing-induced slowdown and financial stress in China; a geopolitical event that impairs global confidence; or contagion from EME oil exporters, where the drop in oil prices has exposed significant existing vulnerabilities.
It is also possible that potential growth in EMEs is much lower than estimated.
A slowdown in EMEs would weigh on US and Canadian economic growth through trade, financial and confidence channels, and put further downward pressure on commodity prices.
However, reduced capacity in many export sectors may limit the extent to which exporters continue to benefit from stronger external demand and the lower Canadian dollar.
At the same time, while data for the third quarter of 2014 pointed to the beginning of a rebound in business investment, particularly in machinery and equipment, the realization of a downside risk to exports would also have negative implications for investment.
Investment spending in this sector could be even weaker based on experience during the oil-price decline witnessed in 1986, which was similar in magnitude to the current episode.
Together, a decline in exports and business investment would pose a downside risk to inflation.
A soft landing in the housing sector continues to be the most likely scenario, with residential investment expected to gradually decline over the projection horizon.
However, near-record-high house prices and debt levels relative to income continue to leave households vulnerable to adverse shocks.
The precise magnitude of the impact of the fall in oil prices on household income, spending and, ultimately, on existing imbalances is highly uncertain.
However, some further increase in the debt-to-income ratio is likely.
Global financial conditions have eased further in recent months, as many central banks have added to monetary policy stimulus in response to persistent economic slack and below-target inflation.
The effects of lower prices for oil and other commodities are working their way through the world economy, boosting overall global growth, but weakening growth prospects in some countries.
All things considered, the Bank expects global economic growth to strengthen and average about 3 1/2 per cent over the 2015-17 period, in line with the January Monetary Policy Report.
In this global context, the economic prospects of major economies continue to diverge.
As the US economy strengthens, the Federal Reserve is widely expected to start normalizing monetary policy later this year - in contrast to the ongoing easing in other advanced economies.
The substantial strengthening of the US dollar against most other currencies, notably the euro, the yen and the Canadian dollar, largely reflects such differences and, over time, will contribute to mitigating them by boosting net exports in the weaker economies.
The sharp drop in oil prices as well as lower commodity food prices have been key common factors behind weak total CPI inflation globally.
Although the disinflationary effects of lower oil and food prices are generally expected to be transitory, core inflation in many countries has been well below inflation targets for an extended period.
Persistent excess global supply has been a steady source of downward pressure on underlying inflation in the advanced economies.
Labour gaps also remain large.
While some countries have achieved significant reductions in headline unemployment rates, in many advanced economies, high rates of long-term unemployment and modest wage growth suggest that labour market slack remains.
In response to this persistent economic slack and low inflation, as well as the weakening growth prospects of some commodity producers, more than 25 central banks of advanced and emerging-market economies, representing over half of world GDP, have lowered their policy rates further or introduced additional unconventional easing measures since the start of 2015.
Notably, the European Central Bank announced a quantitative easing program in January and began asset purchases in early March.
As well, policy deposit rates are negative in the euro area and in several other European countries.
Yields on long-term bonds have reached historical lows across most advanced economies, reflecting both market expectations for low short-term interest rates in the future and compressed term premiums.
In particular, the asset purchase programs implemented by the ECB and the Bank of Japan have lowered term premiums, with spillover effects into yields in other countries.
In many euro-area countries, long-term bond yields have fallen sharply, in some cases even showing negative rates on terms beyond five years.
At the same time, the gap between lending rates in the core and peripheral countries has narrowed, with the exception of Greece.
The additional policy easing in many countries in recent months has boosted stock market indexes globally, particularly in Europe, and many indexes remain at or near record highs.
Credit spreads for both investment-grade and high-yield issuers have contracted further.
Uneven growth prospects across regions and expectations of diverging monetary policy paths have been reflected in higher levels of financial market volatility, particularly in fixed-income and foreign exchange markets.
An increase in volatility toward more normal levels is to be expected with the re-emergence of two-way risk in policy rates.
Some central banks have lowered rates to negative values - below what was previously viewed as a lower bound.
In other countries, such as the United States and the United Kingdom, market prices reflect expectations of rising policy rates.
These same forces have also contributed to the further appreciation of the US dollar against other currencies, including the Canadian dollar.
Since January, the Canadian dollar has depreciated against the US dollar, largely reflecting the broad strength of the US dollar and the expected divergence in the paths for monetary policy in the two countries.
The current level of the Canadian dollar is also consistent with the dollar's historical relationship with oil prices.
By convention, the Canadian dollar is assumed to be close to its recent average level of 79 cents over the projection horizon, compared with the 86 cents assumed in January.
Following their sharp slide in the second half of 2014, the benchmark oil prices that are relevant for the Canadian economy have been quite volatile, fluctuating at or below levels assumed in the January Report.
Prices for West Texas Intermediate and Western Canada Select - the main pricing benchmarks for Western Canadian producers - continue to be influenced by rising US oil production, even as refinery maintenance and strikes have curbed demand.
In response to low prices, many oil producers, particularly those with higher-cost projects in US shale and the Canadian oil sands, have announced steep cuts to their capital expenditure budgets, and drilling activity has fallen sharply.
Consequently, estimates of oil supply growth over the next three years have been revised down among producers who are not members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries.
By convention, the Bank assumes that energy prices will remain near their recent levels over the projection horizon.
The US-dollar prices for Brent, WTI and WCS have averaged roughly $55, $50 and $35 per barrel, respectively, since early March.
Relative to assumptions in the January Report, these prices are $5 weaker for all three benchmarks.
Over the remainder of 2015, there continue to be important downside risks to oil prices, since it will take time for cuts in investment to be reflected in reduced production.
With continued overproduction, oil inventories have been accumulating rapidly, particularly in the United States.
The "contango" in oil futures markets (i.e., when futures prices are above spot prices) is encouraging the accumulation of inventories.
As long as this price spread exceeds storage costs, oil market participants can buy relatively cheap oil today and sell it forward for future delivery, locking in risk-free profits.
In a situation such as the current one, where supply is still adjusting to lower prices, such storage behaviour tends to stabilize market prices by removing oil from the market when it is relatively abundant and making it available at a later date, when it may be scarcer.
There is a risk, however, that the available storage capacity will be filled up before production is brought back into line with demand growth, triggering a further drop in prices.
The upside risks continue to be supply driven.
Without a sufficient increase in OPEC production capacity, higher-cost, non-OPEC unconventional supply will be needed to meet rising global demand.
Persistently low investment in new oil projects could significantly reduce future growth in oil supplies, leading to higher prices.
This upward pressure will be partly mitigated by cost-cutting initiatives, which, together with ongoing technological advances, are helping to lower the cost of producing oil.
On the downside, competition among major producers and reduced demand as a result of energy efficiency and regulation could put downward pressure on oil prices.
As well, depending on the outcome of negotiations with Iran currently scheduled to conclude in June, additional Iranian oil supplies could return to the market.
Prices are expected to remain volatile as the structure of the oil market continues to evolve-particularly since OPEC producers are less able to play their customary role as the "swing producer" in stabilizing prices.
In this context, market supply will adjust mainly through the uncoordinated production decisions of higher-cost producers such as shale producers.
Such actions are not likely to rebalance the market as quickly as in periods when OPEC has taken coordinated action to stabilize prices.
Commodity prices are being held down by commodity-specific supply factors in the context of the weak growth of global demand over the past few years.
The Bank's indexes of energy and non-energy commodity prices are both below their historical averages in real terms.
Despite robust demand triggered by the cold weather this winter, natural gas prices have fallen sharply since November, reflecting very strong US production.
Meanwhile, non-energy commodity prices have also continued to move down.
Agricultural commodity prices are near their lowest levels in five years, owing to good harvests for grains in recent years and improving supply prospects for livestock.
Hog prices are declining as producers rebuild their herds in response to record-high prices last summer.
Lumber prices have also fallen, since extremely cold weather impeded North American construction activity in early 2015.
The ongoing correction in the Chinese housing market, meanwhile, is putting persistent downward pressure on the prices of base metals.
The global spot price for iron ore has declined by 50 per cent over the past year, as low-cost production capacity has been brought online in Australia and Brazil, despite the slowdown in demand growth.
The Bank's non-energy commodity price index has fallen by 5 per cent since the January Report and is expected to continue to decline over the first half of 2015, before rising modestly over the remainder of the projection period as the global economy strengthens.
Both low oil prices and accommodative monetary policy are providing support for the global economy.
The economic prospects of the major economies continue to diverge, however, as the benefits of low oil prices vary across regions, and headwinds linger in many economies.
In the United States, despite a weak start to 2015, real GDP growth is expected to strengthen and to become increasingly self-sustaining, led by strong private domestic demand.
Economic activity in the first quarter of 2015 was negatively affected by several transitory factors, including severe winter weather and disruptions caused by the West Coast port strike.
Much of this activity is expected to be recovered over the coming months, however, as suggested by other indicators, such as employment growth and confidence.
Together with low oil prices, an improving labour market should contribute to solid growth in real disposable income and household spending.
A sustained expansion in US residential investment - a key market for Canada's exports - has been slow to materialize.
However, with robust growth in labour income, low mortgage rates and signs that household formation is improving, new housing construction is still expected to post strong growth later this year.
A pickup in household demand and ongoing improvements in confidence, combined with healthy firm balance sheets, should further stimulate business investment.
The appreciation of the US dollar, which reflects this relatively positive economic outlook, is nevertheless expected to be a drag on US growth.
Headwinds to growth have been slower to dissipate in other oil-importing advanced economies.
In the euro area, economic activity is projected to be stronger than in recent years in light of low oil prices and the announcement and implementation of quantitative easing.
The recovery is nevertheless expected to remain modest and uneven across the region, since the need for private deleveraging remains high and labour market conditions continue to be difficult in some economies.
In Japan, growth is expected to increase over the projection horizon, but weak increases in real wages and low confidence are hindering progress toward achieving the country's policy objectives.
In contrast, growth has been picking up more strongly in the United Kingdom, in part reflecting greater progress in deleveraging and balance-sheet repair following the global financial crisis.
In China, a correction in the property market and weaker investment, brought about in part by actions by the authorities to rebalance the economy, have led to a slowdown in activity.
In response, policy support has been introduced.
Economic growth in 2015 is now expected to come in around the authorities' target of about 7 per cent.
Solid growth is anticipated in other parts of emerging Asia, notably India, contributing to a pickup in global growth in 2016.
Low commodity prices have dampened the growth prospects of many emerging-market commodity exporters, who are facing declines in their terms of trade, government revenues, investment and confidence.
In some cases, geopolitical uncertainty is exacerbating these negative effects.
The appreciation of the US dollar against most other major currencies is helping to mitigate differences in growth prospects by strengthening the export competitiveness of slower-growing regions.
Notably, the euro, the yen and the currencies of many commodity-exporting countries have depreciated against the US dollar.
The gains in net trade resulting from the depreciation of the euro and the yen should provide some offset to the lingering headwinds in these regions.
Overall, while the regional composition of growth has shifted somewhat, the Bank continues to expect global growth to average about 3 1/2 per cent over the projection horizon, in line with the January Report.
Core inflation has remained close to 2 per cent in recent months, while total CPI inflation has slowed to 1 per cent, reflecting the fall in gasoline prices.
Core inflation has been boosted by the pass-through effects of the lower Canadian dollar and some sector-specific factors that have been offsetting the disinflationary pressures from economic slack.
The broad implications of the decline in oil prices for the Canadian economy remain as described in the January Report, although the negative effects appear to be even more front-loaded.
The negative impact on income and wealth associated with the fall in the terms of trade is already reducing household spending.
The Bank now expects that the Canadian economy stalled in the first quarter of 2015, leading to a widening in the degree of excess capacity and additional downward pressure on inflation.
Beyond the energy sector, the natural sequence of stronger exports, increased investment and improved employment opportunities is progressing, even though the temporary weakening in the US economy early in the year has slowed this process.
Looking ahead, this sequence will be bolstered by strengthening US demand and by the considerable easing in financial conditions that has occurred, resulting in part from the January cut to the target for the overnight rate.
As the impact of the oil price shock on growth starts to dissipate, this natural sequence is expected to re-emerge as the dominant trend around mid-year.
On an average annual basis, real GDP is expected to grow by 1.9 per cent in 2015 and 2.5 per cent in 2016, roughly the same as anticipated in January.
However, the composition of growth will be somewhat different, with stronger exports and a smaller pickup in investment.
In 2017, real GDP is expected to grow by 2.0 per cent.
Based on the assumption that Brent will be priced at US$55 per barrel, total CPI inflation is expected to ease to slightly below 1 per cent in the coming months before rising to the 2 per cent target early in 2016.
Core inflation is anticipated to remain near 2 per cent over the projection horizon, as the upward pressure from past exchange rate depreciation offsets the ongoing downward pressure from excess supply, which will gradually diminish as the output gap closes.
The Bank continues to expect that core and total CPI inflation will be at 2 per cent on a sustainable basis around the end of 2016 as the economy reaches full capacity.
Core inflation, as measured by CPIX, has been relatively stable at about 2 per cent in recent months, since the temporary effects of sector-specific factors (mainly meat and communications prices) and the pass-through effects of the depreciation of the Canadian dollar have offset the disinflationary forces from slack in the economy and heightened competition in the retail sector.
The temporary boost to core inflation from sector-specific factors has begun to dissipate and is now estimated to be 0.2 percentage points.
The disinflationary effect of heightened competition in the retail sector continues to wane and is currently estimated to lower core inflation by only 0.1 percentage point.
The Bank estimates that the impact of the pass-through from exchange rate depreciation is currently boosting core inflation by about 0.3 to 0.4 percentage points.
A comparison of price developments in Canada with those in the United States supports this assessment.
The estimated pass-through is higher than was estimated in January, as the effects of the additional depreciation of the Canadian dollar since then are starting to materialize.
However, none of the measures of core inflation, including CPIX, can perfectly capture underlying inflation at any given time.
For example, all of the alternative measures of core inflation are currently being boosted to varying degrees by exchange rate pass-through.
The Bank's analysis indicates that, without this pass-through, these measures of inflation would range from about 1.6 per cent to 1.8 per cent.
Taking these measures into account, together with other indicators of economic slack, the Bank's view is that underlying inflation is still below 2 per cent.
Thus, if the output gap failed to close as projected by the Bank, inflation would drift down below 2 per cent.
Total CPI inflation slowed to 1 per cent, reflecting a steep decline in year-over-year gasoline prices.
This drop in total CPI inflation was smaller than expected at the time of the January Report, largely owing to the further depreciation of the Canadian dollar against the US dollar.
The negative effects of lower oil prices have begun to emerge and seem to be more front-loaded than expected in January.
Not surprisingly, there is considerable dispersion in the regional impacts of these developments, with areas that have a larger energy-production footprint more adversely affected.
The decline in commodity prices is having a large effect on income, with Canada's real gross domestic income decreasing by 0.7 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2014.
Canada's terms of trade declined by about 8 per cent in the fourth quarter and are estimated to have continued to deteriorate in the first quarter of 2015.
A number of signals suggest that the reduction in domestic incomes, profits and wealth associated with this deterioration is already affecting household spending.
While there are other factors contributing to near-term weakness, the volume of retail sales declined markedly in December and January.
In addition, residential investment slowed in the fourth quarter of 2014 and is estimated to have fallen off significantly in the first quarter of 2015.
After picking up in the middle of last year, business investment declined in the fourth quarter.
Steep cuts to capital expenditures in the oil industry have been announced, and rigging activity has decreased precipitously since the beginning of the year.
The Bank's estimate of real GDP in the first quarter of 2015 has been revised down since the January Report, to essentially no growth, primarily reflecting the pulling forward of the impact of the oil price shock.
Other factors at play included harsh winter weather and temporary weakness in US economic activity.
The Bank monitors a wide array of indicators to assess the degree of capacity pressures in the Canadian economy.
Two of the most important indicators point to an increase in excess capacity in the first quarter: the Bank's statistical measure of the output gap is estimated to be about -1/2 per cent, while the structural measure, which has been updated to reflect our reassessment of potential output growth , suggests excess capacity of 1 1/2 per cent in the first quarter.
In contrast, the spring Business Outlook Survey suggests that many firms continue to operate close to capacity.
Meanwhile, labour market conditions appear to have improved modestly, on balance, over the past six months.
For example, the unemployment, underutilization and long-term unemployment rates have all eased, while prime-age labour force participation has begun to recover in recent months following weakness in the middle of 2014.
Despite these encouraging developments, a material degree of slack persists in the labour market, as illustrated by the Bank's labour market indicator.
Moreover, the full impact of the decline in oil prices has yet to show up in employment statistics.
The balance of opinion on hiring intentions in the Business Outlook Survey fell to its lowest level since 2009, and firms reported that labour shortages remain low and are less intense than 12 months ago.
Measures of the utilization of existing capital stock continue to indicate less excess capacity than do measures of labour market slack, consistent with the pattern expected following a destructive recession.
Total industrial capacity utilization has risen above its historical average, to 83.6 per cent.
Capacity utilization in many non-energy industries has also increased in recent quarters, a precursor to greater investment spending.
The most recent Business Outlook Survey indicates that capacity pressures were more prevalent among export-oriented firms, which frequently cited physical capacity constraints as a key obstacle to meeting a sudden rise in demand.
Taking into account the various indicators of capacity pressures, the Bank judges that there is material slack in the Canadian economy.
The amount of excess capacity in the first quarter is estimated to be between 1/2 and 1 1/2 per cent, suggesting more slack and disinflationary pressures than estimated in January.
The easing of financial conditions since January will provide additional support to growth over the projection horizon.
The yield curve on government bonds has shifted down, reflecting the January reduction in the target for the overnight rate as well as developments in global financial markets.
In turn, lower government bond yields have fed through to household and business borrowing rates, which have declined to historical lows.
The balance of opinion on credit conditions in the Bank's Business Outlook Survey points to an easing over the past three months.
Overall, most businesses continue to characterize credit as easy or relatively easy to obtain.
The Bank's Senior Loan Officer Survey for the first quarter of 2015 suggests broadly unchanged overall business-lending conditions.
However, both surveys noted some tightening for firms tied to commodity-related production.
Easier credit conditions, together with the 8 per cent decline in the value of the Canadian dollar relative to the assumption in the January Report, will help to mitigate the negative effects of the decline in oil prices.
They will facilitate the sectoral adjustment needed to strengthen investment, improve firms' cash flows and provide support to household spending.
After stalling in the first quarter, real GDP growth is expected to rebound in the second quarter and subsequently strengthen to average about 2 1/2 per cent on a quarterly basis until the middle of 2016.
The Bank expects that the economy will reach full capacity around the end of 2016.
In 2017, growth will average about 2 per cent.
Given the degree of uncertainty in economic projections, the Bank judges that real GDP growth is likely to be within 0.5 percentage points of the base-case projection in 2015, with a somewhat wider range in 2016 and 2017.
The stronger growth profile for GDP that emerges in mid-2015 occurs as the negative effects of lower oil prices on investment growth in the energy sector start to dissipate and activity in the non-energy sector gains further traction.
In the base-case projection, the low oil price assumption leads to a persistent shift of investment and jobs away from energy-related sectors and regions, reversing some of the earlier structural adjustment in the Canadian economy.
The timing and composition of growth have shifted somewhat relative to the outlook in the January Report.
As already discussed, the negative impact of the decline in oil prices is appearing earlier than previously anticipated but, over the projection horizon, the total drag associated with the decline is estimated to be about the same.
Although the weaker value of the Canadian dollar will provide an additional boost to exports, by increasing the cost of imported capital, the lower dollar will weigh on investment spending.
Taking into account these factors as well as recent indicators and analysis, the Bank has revised down its profile for business investment.
The government spending assumptions contained in the base case provide a small positive contribution to growth over the projection horizon and reflect already announced fiscal measures, as is the Bank's convention.
After two years of weak growth, the pickup in NEX finally materialized in 2014.
The product categories expected to lead the NEX recovery, most of which are sensitive to the exchange rate, grew at their fastest pace since 2000 and have maintained some momentum in the early months of 2015.
Some of the major contributors to this recent surge include aircraft and parts, industrial and electrical machinery and equipment, pharmaceutical products, building and packaging materials, and metal products.
The pickup in the manufacturing sector, which accounts for 70 per cent of NEX, will generate positive spillovers to other sectors, such as transportation and warehousing; wholesale trade; and finance, insurance, real estate and leasing.
The recovery in NEX is expected to become more firmly entrenched as the US economy strengthens.
In addition, the depreciation of the Canadian dollar, combined with stronger labour productivity growth in Canada than in the United States over the past two years, has led to a meaningful improvement in Canada's competitiveness.
Nevertheless, the projected profile of NEX growth is based on prudent assumptions, taking into account the lost capacity and underperformance in this sector over the past decade.
Growth in total business investment is expected to decline significantly in the first half of 2015, reflecting a sizable pullback in the oil and gas sector, before slowly recovering in the second half of the year and gaining momentum in 2016.
The aggregate data for business investment are masking divergent developments in the energy and non-energy sectors.
The Bank expects investment in the oil and gas sector to fall by about 30 per cent in 2015.
In contrast, growth in business investment outside of the oil and gas sector is expected to pick up as non-energy exports grow, remaining excess capacity in these industries is absorbed, and businesses become increasingly confident about the economic outlook.
However, there is considerable uncertainty about how quickly business investment will respond to these favourable drivers.
In the Bank's base-case projection, investment outside of the oil and gas sector is expected to increase by about 7 per cent per year, on average.
This profile is lower than was expected in January, reflecting weaker momentum at the end of 2014, as well as further evidence from the spring Business Outlook Survey that showed a second quarterly decline in the balance of opinion on investment intentions.
In addition, the weaker dollar has raised the cost of imported machinery and equipment.
The loss of wealth and income associated with the rapid decline in Canada's terms of trade will restrain spending growth, although easier financial conditions will provide some offset.
The money that consumers are saving at the gas pump could also help to mitigate the negative income effects, although the extent to which this windfall will be spent or used to pay down debt is not clear.
In recent months, there have been signs of moderation in the national housing market.
Housing starts and resale activity have slowed since last autumn alongside harsh weather conditions in early 2015.
Additionally, a more balanced sales-to-listings ratio has been accompanied by slower growth in house prices.
However, housing market conditions continue to diverge across regions.
To date, the impacts on housing activity from falling energy prices appear to be largely restricted to Canada's energy-producing regions.
The previously robust markets of Calgary and Edmonton have seen steep declines in resale activity and a significant slowdown in the year-over-year growth of house prices in recent months.
At the same time, resale activity has remained strong in British Columbia and Ontario, particularly in Vancouver and Toronto, where house price growth is still elevated.
Despite localized risks, the most likely scenario as the economy gains strength remains a soft landing in the national housing market and a stabilization of debt-to-income ratios.
The January cut in the target for the overnight rate should help to mitigate financial pressures in the household sector by cushioning the decline in income and employment caused by lower oil prices.
It also reduces the likelihood of a more adverse scenario that could cause stress in the financial system.
Core inflation is expected to remain near 2 per cent throughout the projection period.
In the near term, the widening of the output gap is expected to exert additional downward pressure on inflation.
Based on the assumption that the Canadian dollar stays around 79 cents, the pass-through effects are expected to peak in the second half of 2015 and to dissipate by the end of 2016.
Meanwhile, as economic growth picks up and the output gap narrows, the disinflationary pressures from excess supply are expected to gradually diminish.
The effects on core inflation of the lower dollar and the narrowing output gap roughly offset each other over the projection horizon.
With a Brent price of US$55, total CPI inflation is expected to fall slightly below 1 per cent in the coming months, reflecting steep year-over-year declines in gasoline prices, before returning to 2 per cent early in 2016.
Given the volatility in oil prices, there remains a high level of uncertainty about the profile for total CPI inflation.
For example, if the base-case scenario assumed that oil prices were 10 per cent higher , total CPI inflation would be higher by about 0.3 percentage points over the coming year.
As the economy reaches and remains at full capacity around the end of 2016 and with well-anchored inflation expectations, both total and core inflation are projected to be close to 2 per cent on a sustained basis.
While short-term expectations for total CPI inflation remain near the lower end of the control range, medium-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored at 2 per cent.
The March Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation for 2015 is 0.9 per cent, down slightly from January, while the forecast for 2016 has remained unchanged, at 2.1 per cent.
Results from the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey show that the majority of firms anticipate that, over the next two years, total CPI inflation will be in the bottom half of the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range.
This is consistent with low total CPI inflation in 2015, reflecting the downward pressures coming from gasoline prices.
The most important risks to inflation are the following: Considerable uncertainty remains around the future path for oil prices.
Indeed, the Bank believes that there are still downside risks to oil prices in the near term, while over the medium term, risks are tilted to the upside.
At present, however, a more important risk relates to the effect of the oil price shock on the Canadian economy.
While the Bank believes that this additional weakness primarily reflects a pulling forward of the adverse impact of the oil price shock, there is a risk that the negative impact of the shock is larger than estimated.
For example, there could be a larger pullback in investment in the oil and gas sector than currently anticipated.
In addition, the Bank judges that part of the weakness in consumption in the first quarter was related to temporary factors.
If a greater portion was instead attributable to the decline in oil prices, household spending could take longer to recover.
If this risk were to materialize, disinflationary pressures would be more persistent than currently anticipated.
At the national level, a soft landing in the housing sector continues to be the most likely scenario, with residential investment as a share of GDP expected to edge down over the projection horizon.
Nevertheless, elevated house prices and debt levels relative to income continue to leave households vulnerable.
The adverse impact of the oil price shock in Alberta and continued robust price growth in Toronto and Vancouver suggest a risk of a correction in these markets.
While historical experience suggests that localized Canadian house price cycles, both in terms of the factors behind the boom as well as the correction, have typically not spilled over to other regions, it would be a major event if it occurred.
If corrections in several important local markets materialized simultaneously, the spillover effects to the rest of the economy could be significant.
In addition, while the precise magnitude is highly uncertain, the adverse impact of lower oil prices on household income is likely to contribute to a further increase in debt-to-income ratios.
Consumption growth in the United States has been robust, despite modest wage growth over the recent past.
Steady employment gains and improving labour market fundamentals - such as falling levels of long-term unemployment and of involuntary part-time workers - suggest that wage growth could strengthen more quickly than anticipated as labour market slack is taken up.
Higher wage growth, together with the boost from lower oil prices, could trigger even faster consumption growth.
Businesses would increase hiring and investment by more than expected, further supporting household spending and economic activity more generally.
Stronger US activity would generate positive spillovers to growth in the rest of the world, and in particular to demand for Canadian non-energy exports and to Canadian business investment.
The global economy continues to face pervasive weak demand.
While low oil prices will, over time, be a net benefit for global economic activity, the negative effects on oil producers are materializing more quickly than the positive effects on expenditures by oil consumers.
In the first part of 2015, global economic growth faltered.
This slowdown reflects, in part, the weakness of the US economy in the early months of the year, which was the result of a combination of transitory factors and some loss of momentum.
The Chinese economy is slowing amid an ongoing process of rebalancing to a more sustainable growth path.
In the euro area, a tentative recovery continues, despite the uncertainty associated with Greece.
Financial conditions remain accommodative globally and should continue to provide much-needed support to economic activity.
Global growth should strengthen over the second half of 2015, averaging about 3 per cent for the year.
Accommodative monetary policy, gradually dissipating headwinds and progress on structural reforms will help support economic activity.
The Bank expects global growth to pick up to just above 3 1/2 per cent in 2016 and 2017.
Central banks have maintained a highly accommodative monetary policy stance, consistent with widespread economic slack, and, in some cases, they have eased policy further since April.
However, downward pressure on total CPI inflation has been moderating globally as the temporary disinflationary impact of lower oil and food prices dissipates.
In this context, acute concerns over the risk of deflation in the euro area have eased.
Despite the significant easing in monetary policy across much of the global economy since the beginning of the year, long-term government bond yields have increased sharply since April in a number of advanced economies, returning to levels observed in the fourth quarter of 2014.
This rise in long-term yields was driven in large part by higher term premiums, while expected inflation, as measured by break-even inflation rates, has remained stable.
Market participants view the backup in yields as a reflection of better-than-expected economic data in the euro area, a lower risk of deflation and some technical factors.
More recently, yields have stabilized in response to rising safe-haven flows associated with the stock market decline in China and uncertainty over developments in Greece.
Sovereign bond spreads between peripheral and core members of the euro area have widened modestly, although the broader market reaction has so far been relatively muted.
Credit spreads for both investment-grade and high-yield issuers are also slightly wider since April.
Equity prices in North America, Europe and a number of emerging markets in addition to China have also declined.
Volatility in most asset classes has edged up, returning to historical averages.
Notwithstanding these recent developments, global financial conditions continue to provide significant support to global economic activity.
The US economy stumbled in the first quarter of 2015.
A number of factors were responsible for the setback, including temporary disruptions to activity from severe weather and the West Coast port strike, the drag on net exports from a strong US dollar, and the negative impact of the oil price shock on investment.
Since the United States is a net importer of oil, the decline in oil prices is expected to have a net benefit on its economy, even though investment in the US energy sector has contracted sharply.
In the United States, in contrast to Canada, lower oil prices have contributed to an improvement in the terms of trade, which is providing a boost to real gross domestic income.
Despite the increase in household real disposable income resulting from lower gasoline prices, the response of US consumer spending to this windfall has been sluggish.
As consumers increasingly perceive the decline in gasoline prices to be durable, they are more likely to increase their spending.
The recent surge in motor vehicle sales and, more broadly, the momentum in retail sales are positive signs that this is starting to occur.
As consumption increasingly responds to low oil prices and the effects of one-off factors dissipate, US economic growth is expected to be solid over the second half of the year and through the projection horizon.
For more than a year, employment growth has averaged close to 250,000 jobs a month and labour market slack has been diminishing.
Meanwhile, consumer confidence has returned to pre-crisis levels and, in conjunction with robust growth in real disposable income and accommodative financial conditions, is expected to support strong consumption and a recovery in the housing market.
Residential investment should also continue to strengthen, in line with an increase in the rate of new household formation.
Strong domestic demand and healthy firm balance sheets should provide support to business investment.
Nevertheless, the past appreciation of the US dollar is expected to restrain US growth.
Notwithstanding the anticipated pickup in growth, the much weaker first quarter of 2015, as well as softer-than-expected consumer spending entering the second quarter, leaves the outlook for growth below that anticipated at the time of the April Report.
In other major advanced economies, the recovery is proceeding gradually.
In the euro area, low oil prices, ongoing monetary policy easing and the past depreciation of the euro are supporting growth.
However, persistent headwinds, including high levels of unemployment, weak credit growth, ongoing deleveraging and underlying structural deficiencies, continue to weigh on prospects for a more robust recovery.
In Japan, although economic activity in the first quarter was considerably stronger than anticipated, consumption and wage growth remain muted, and inflation has been stubbornly weak.
Given that countries are at different stages of recovery, financial markets expect monetary policies in the major advanced economies to follow divergent paths: only the US Federal Reserve is expected to tighten its monetary stance in the near future.
Consequently, the US dollar has appreciated against most major currencies.
The higher US dollar is helping to rebalance global economic activity by enhancing the export competitiveness of slower-growing regions.
Growth in China fell below 6 per cent in the first quarter on a seasonally adjusted basis as restrictions on local government credit, the correction in the housing market and weak exports weighed on activity.
Growth is expected to improve through the remainder of the year as exports strengthen, the housing market correction runs its course and targeted stimulus measures provide some support to activity.
Since there is considerable uncertainty around the timing and impact of each of these developments, the authorities' stated growth target of approximately 7 per cent for 2015 is at risk.
The sharp correction in major Chinese stock indexes in recent weeks reflects, in part, these concerns and could have broader negative effects on confidence.
Through 2016 and 2017, the managed slowing of economic growth in China is expected to continue as the authorities rebalance the economy away from investment and address financial vulnerabilities.
This process will be protracted and challenging and could involve some volatility along the adjustment path while authorities formulate and implement structural reform policies.
Other emerging markets, including Brazil, have been negatively affected by both subdued exports and declines in their terms of trade.
Structural bottlenecks also continue to weigh on growth throughout the emerging world.
Over the projection horizon, low oil prices and the implementation of structural reforms should support growth among oil-importing emerging markets.
In many oil-exporting economies, economic growth slowed or contracted in early 2015 while lower oil prices worked their way through terms-of-trade, investment and government revenue channels - effects that were exacerbated in some instances by geopolitical tensions.
Growth in these economies is expected to recover in 2016-17 as the drag from lower oil prices on oil exporters dissipates.
Nonetheless, low oil prices in comparison with mid-2014 will result in a persistently softer level of activity in oil-exporting economies.
Robust growth in the supply of non-energy commodities amid subdued global demand has contributed to a period of steady decline in the Bank's non-energy commodity price index in recent years.
In particular, the slowdown in China's housing market since mid-2014 has weighed on demand for base metals.
Expectations of a steady improvement in the US housing market have provided some support to lumber prices in recent months, and prices for agricultural products have surged, with higher hog prices and deteriorating supply prospects for key grains.
Taking these developments together, the non-energy commodity price index is little changed since the April Report.
The Bank is assuming that prices of non-energy commodities will remain near their recent levels, subject to largely offsetting forces.
On the upside, the anticipated pickup in global economic activity should support demand, with a material strengthening in demand for non-energy commodities hinging on the prospects for growth among large consumers of commodities such as China and other emerging-market economies.
On the downside, for some non-energy commodities, the considerable expansion of global production capacity in recent years could put further downward pressure on prices.
Relatively low oil prices are also reducing the costs of production for many commodities, which could support supply growth.
Oil prices strengthened through May as the effects of the sharp drop in prices on both demand and supply began to materialize.
In response to low oil prices, gasoline demand and refining activity increased, and there are indications that China accelerated its stockpiling activity.
As well, colder-than-normal weather in early 2015 temporarily increased the demand for oil.
On the supply side, US shale production levelled off in April after rising steadily since 2010 and is expected to decline in the second half of 2015, reflecting a sharp drop in the number of active drilling rigs since November 2014.
Ongoing geopolitical tensions in the Middle East and disruptions at Libyan ports added to the upward pressure on oil prices.
The price for Western Canada Select also strengthened relative to global benchmarks over this period, driven by temporary disruptions in oil sands production.
WCS prices should continue to benefit from increased demand in response to added transportation and refinery capacity for Canadian heavy oil.
Very recently, global oil prices have fallen back toward levels assumed in the April Report, driven by uncertainty regarding developments in Greece and Chinese equity markets, ongoing excess supply, and the prospect of additional Iranian oil exports returning to the market.
The US-dollar per barrel prices for Brent, West Texas Intermediate and WCS have averaged roughly $65, $60 and $50, respectively, since the end of May.
The prices received by North American producers are $10-$15 higher than assumed at the time of the April Report, but about $50 below their peaks in June 2014.
On the upside, reduced investment in new production capacity is expected to constrain future supply growth, while oil demand is anticipated to be supported by stronger global activity.
This upside risk is limited, however, by ongoing cost-cutting initiatives and technological advances, which are continuing to lower the oil supply cost curve while also increasing the resilience of unconventional oil production, such as shale oil, to low oil prices.
On the downside, inventories are high, global production is still very strong, and there is potential for some members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries to raise supply.
The Bank's commodity price index is roughly unchanged from the April Report and is still low compared with the levels observed over the post recession period.
The setback in global activity in the first quarter had important implications for Canada.
The Bank's foreign activity measure, which captures the composition of foreign demand for Canadian exports, slowed significantly in the first quarter of 2015 in response to the front-loaded and negative effects of the oil price decline on US investment, as well as the West Coast port strike.
The measure is estimated to have bounced back in the second quarter, driven mainly by the rebound in non-residential construction and, to a lesser extent, US consumption, particularly motor vehicle sales.
Over the remainder of 2015 and through 2016-17, Canadian exports should benefit from the growing strength of Canada's major trading partner, the United States.
By convention, the Canadian dollar is assumed to be close to its recent average level of 80 cents over the projection horizon, similar to the 79 cents assumed in the April Report.
Total CPI inflation has remained around 1 per cent in recent months, reflecting year-over-year price declines for gasoline and other consumer energy products.
Core inflation as measured by CPIX has been slightly above 2 per cent, since the disinflationary pressures from economic slack are being offset by the transitory effects of the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar and some sector-specific factors.
Aggregate growth is reflecting economic activity that is progressing along two different tracks.
On the first track, the resource sector is restructuring in response to the drop in oil prices since last summer, as well as the decline in other commodity prices that began several years ago.
The second track is occurring outside of the resource sector, where ongoing moderate growth is being underpinned by solid Canadian household spending and the recovery of the US economy.
As the second track gains strength and Canadian producers benefit from the depreciation of the Canadian dollar, it should re-emerge as the dominant one.
Real GDP in Canada is now estimated to have contracted modestly in the first half of 2015, resulting in a marked increase in excess capacity and additional downward pressure on inflation.
A significant part of the weakness is related to the oil price shock, although non-energy goods exports fell as well.
While some of the export weakness can be explained by the temporary pause in US activity earlier this year and a drop in production in response to low prices for non-energy commodities, the extent of the weakness is puzzling.
The Bank expects real GDP growth to resume in the third quarter.
While business investment in the energy sector will likely contract further, growth will be supported by a partial recovery in exports and by federal fiscal stimulus, which should boost consumption.
Starting in the fourth quarter, real GDP growth is expected to exceed potential as the drag from the resource sector dissipates and the recovery in the non-resource sector strengthens.
On an average annual basis, real GDP is projected to grow by just over 1 per cent in 2015 and about 2 1/2 per cent in 2016 and 2017.
With this growth profile, the Canadian economy returns to potential in the first half of 2017, slightly later than anticipated in April.
The Bank's estimate of economic output in 2015 has been marked down considerably since the April Report, owing in part to the weakness in exports.
In addition, energy firms have downgraded their investment intentions, since they now expect lower oil prices to be more persistent.
Total CPI inflation is projected to rise to about 2 per cent in 2016 once the temporary effect of lower energy prices disappears from the inflation data.
Core inflation will be close to 2 per cent over the projection period, with the upward pressure from the pass-through effects of the lower dollar largely offsetting the disinflationary effects of economic slack.
The Bank expects that inflation will return to 2 per cent on a sustained basis in the first half of 2017 as the economy reaches and remains at full capacity.
Persistent economic slack and the drop in energy prices continue to weigh on inflation in Canada.
Total CPI inflation has remained around 1 per cent in recent months, reflecting year-over-year declines in prices for gasoline and other consumer energy products.
In contrast, core inflation as measured by CPIX has been slightly above 2 per cent, boosted by the pass-through effects of the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar and some sector-specific factors, which have offset the disinflationary force from slack in the economy.
Although the impact of pass-through is difficult to gauge precisely, the Bank estimates that it is currently raising CPIX inflation by about 0.4 to 0.6 percentage points.
The underlying trend in inflation is assessed to be 1.5 to 1.7 per cent, a bit lower than in the April Report, consistent with material and increased slack in the Canadian economy.
The fall in oil prices since the middle of last year had an immediate and marked impact on Canada's terms of trade and real gross domestic income and subsequently on real economic activity in the first half of 2015.
About one-third of the income gains associated with the commodity price increases since early 2002 have been reversed.
Of the various components of income, corporate profits have so far borne the brunt of the shock, with profits declining by almost 15 per cent since the third quarter of 2014.
Developments in the resource sector - the first growth track - were the primary source of weakness in the first half of the year, although a temporary faltering of US activity also restrained growth.
Business investment plunged 16 per cent in the first quarter and was the main contributor to the 0.6 per cent decline in real GDP.
The pullback in business investment was particularly pronounced in components that are heavily weighted toward the oil and gas sector.
The Bank estimates that economic activity contracted further, by about half a per cent, in the second quarter.
Total business investment is estimated to have declined sharply in the quarter as investment in the oil and gas sector continues to retrench, in line with recent industry announcements.
Exports also appear to have contracted, with persistently low non-energy commodity prices leading some firms to curtail production, while non-commodity goods exports have lost momentum.
As of May, for example, intermediate metal products and industrial machinery, equipment and parts (two of the export categories expected to lead the recovery and that registered strong growth in 2014) had contracted by about 20 per cent and 5 per cent, respectively, since the beginning of the year.
Activity in the non-resource sector - the second growth track - has been firmer.
Consumption growth is expected to pick up in the second quarter.
In particular, sales of motor vehicles rebounded strongly following harsh weather conditions that depressed sales earlier in the year.
Viewed through the two-track lens, real GDP outside the resource industries has continued to expand at a moderate pace, while resource industries have contracted.
Adjustments to commodity price declines are playing out differently across regions.
Overall, household spending has held up, in part because aggregate household income has continued to grow, despite the decline in real GDI.
While income from wages and salaries in mining, oil and gas extraction is down by almost 3 per cent since the third quarter of 2014, growth in wage income outside this sector has been comparable to that observed before the fall in oil prices.
In the oil-producing provinces, households have begun to curtail their expenditures.
Sales of existing homes and new motor vehicles in these provinces are down by more than 15 per cent since last November, in contrast to modest increases at the national level.
The Bank's two measures of the output gap indicate that slack in the Canadian economy increased by about 1 percentage point through the first half of 2015.
The statistical measure is estimated to have widened to -1.3 per cent in the second quarter, while the structural measure suggests excess capacity of 2.2 per cent.
The labour market is undergoing a significant adjustment in response to the oil price shock.
While the national unemployment rate has remained unchanged at 6.8 per cent in recent months, the provincial rate has increased significantly in the oil-producing provinces, and further job losses in oil and related industries are anticipated.
The Bank's summer Business Outlook Survey finds fewer firms reporting labour shortages.
As well, the BOS indicator of labour shortage intensity is at its lowest level since the second quarter of 2010.
With the fall in employment in the oil-producing provinces, interprovincial commuting and migration have also declined from recent high levels.
As a result, labour supply has increased elsewhere in the country, and reports of shortages of skilled labour have abated in some provinces.
These developments are consistent with ongoing material slack in the labour market.
In this context, overall labour market conditions have held up reasonably well.
The Bank's labour market indicator has edged down, reflecting improvements in a range of labour market variables, including long-term unemployment, prime-age participation and wage growth.
Meanwhile, pressures on physical capacity appear to be building in some regions and sectors - as would be expected at this stage in the recovery from a destructive recession.
The summer Business Outlook Survey finds that a greater number of firms are operating at close to capacity, with 47 per cent saying they would have some or significant difficulty responding to an unexpected increase in demand.
Firms most often cited physical bottlenecks as the main obstacle to scaling up their production.
Increased capacity pressures should eventually be a catalyst for stronger business investment.
Overall, the Bank judges that the amount of excess capacity widened in the second quarter, to between 1 1/4 and 2 1/4 per cent.
Financial conditions continue to be easier than before the January reduction in the target for the overnight rate and are providing support to economic activity.
Canadian government bond yields have stayed relatively low and stable at short - and medium-term maturities.
However, long-term yields have moved higher, along with global rates.
Nevertheless, effective borrowing rates for households and firms have remained close to historical lows.
Overall credit conditions continue to be very supportive of activity.
The results of the Business Outlook Survey, meanwhile, suggest an easing in credit conditions in the second quarter, marking the sixth consecutive quarter in which firms reported a net easing in terms and conditions.
In the context of stimulative financial conditions, business credit growth has increased in recent months.
The growth rate of household credit has remained close to 5 per cent since the end of 2014, slightly stronger than the growth of disposable income.
The Bank anticipates that the non-resource track for growth will begin to dominate in the third quarter and that the economy will expand by roughly 1 1/2 per cent.
Consumption is expected to accelerate as household disposable income receives a boost from retroactive federal payments to families with children.
Importantly, exports are projected to return to solid growth, supported by continued improvements in US demand and a rebound in automotive exports following temporary shutdowns for retooling at the beginning of the year.
Business investment will remain a source of drag, however, as the energy sector continues to adjust to low oil prices.
Many indicators point to a return to growth in the third quarter.
Outside the oil-producing provinces, consumer confidence remains high and labour markets continue to improve.
Gains in non-resource employment have averaged almost 20,000 jobs per month since the beginning of the year.
Recent survey data suggest that manufacturing activity has picked up, and firms indicated that foreign demand was improving.
In addition, results from the Business Outlook Survey point to rising capacity pressures among manufacturers, as many businesses plan to increase their investment and employment to address capacity constraints.
This is reinforced by evidence that manufacturing firms have increased their borrowing, which may be a precursor to an expansion in capacity.
Beginning in the fourth quarter of this year, real GDP is projected to grow above potential as the non-resource sector gains strength and the negative effects of the oil price shock on growth dissipate.
An important sign that the natural sequence of stronger foreign demand, exports, confidence, investment and employment is taking hold is firm creation, which is now above its post-crisis average.
Looking through month-to-month volatility, energy exports continue to grow.
In contrast, non-energy goods exports have lost momentum, owing in part to softer foreign demand and reduced supply in response to low commodity prices.
The decline in exports appears larger than can be explained by these factors alone.
The Bank's base-case projection assumes that this unexplained weakness is temporary and that the relationship between exports and foreign activity will reassert itself in the coming quarters.
As in the past, the Bank's export projection is nevertheless conservative, taking into account the underperformance of the sector in recent years.
More precisely, exports are anticipated to regain momentum in the second half of the year as US private domestic demand regains strength, energy-production capacity comes back online and additional capacity is added, and global demand growth picks up.
Moreover, the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar has improved the competitiveness of Canadian producers.
While the timing and magnitude of the benefits of the lower dollar will differ across exporters, export categories that have historically been more sensitive to exchange rate movements are already showing stronger activity than other categories.
Examples of export categories that show particular sensitivity to exchange rates include building and packaging materials, furniture and fixtures, clothing and textile products, and large motor vehicles (e.g., heavy trucks and buses).
Exports of services, which constitute about 15 per cent of total exports and are benefiting from the lower Canadian dollar, have accelerated, with year-over-year growth picking up from about 1 per cent in the beginning of 2013 to about 3 per cent in recent quarters.
The Bank's projection for exports is supported by results from the summer Business Outlook Survey: many firms, particularly in the manufacturing sector, noted that stronger US growth prospects have translated into an improved sales outlook.
Moreover, some exporters cited the lower Canadian dollar as having a positive impact on sales volumes.
The results of the Spring 2015 Trade Confidence Index survey conducted by Export Development Canada provide corroborating evidence that the positive effects of the lower dollar for Canadian exporters are becoming more evident.
The Bank's projection for investment growth in the coming quarters has been revised downward, reflecting developments on the resource track.
Based on industry announcements of capital expenditure plans, the Bank now estimates that investment in the oil and gas sector will contract by close to 40 per cent this year, compared with an earlier estimate of about 30 per cent.
Discussions with energy firms suggest that this revision primarily reflects lower expectations about the future path of oil prices.
The outlook for investment in this sector remains highly uncertain, particularly for large-scale projects with long investment horizons, given the challenges in predicting returns and the risks associated with forecasting future oil prices.
In addition, softer foreign demand and low commodity prices are leading firms in non-energy commodity industries to further delay or curtail investment spending.
Business investment growth outside the energy sector is likely to be subdued in the near term, owing to ongoing uncertainty about the resilience of demand, some remaining excess capacity in a few manufacturing sectors, and developments in commodity-extraction and related industries.
Results of the summer Business Outlook Survey suggest that firms continue to wait for signs of a sustained pickup in demand before increasing investment; concerns about both domestic and foreign demand remain the most important factor cited by firms as restraining their investment.
Financial conditions continue to be favourable for investment spending, even though the weaker Canadian dollar has raised the cost of imported machinery and equipment.
At the same time, the dollar's depreciation in the wake of the decline in commodity prices has had mixed effects on margins and corporate cash flow.
For many exporters, the lower exchange rate has boosted margins and cash flow expressed in Canadian dollars, which have provided a source of funds that could enable an expansion in investment spending.
In contrast, for domestic firms with relatively higher import content in their production processes, the higher Canadian-dollar cost of imports is potentially squeezing margins and cash flow.
Overall, as US demand growth becomes more durable and non-energy exports regain momentum, business confidence will likely strengthen and the natural sequence will reassert itself.
A pickup in business investment growth should follow as firms look to increase capacity to meet stronger domestic and foreign demand.
In this sequence, investment in machinery and equipment is expected to be the main source of growth in business spending, supported by robust demand in the manufacturing sector and favourable financing conditions.
Household expenditures are expected to continue to grow at a moderate pace over the projection period.
Regional divergences are evident as energy firms continue to adjust their employment in response to lower oil prices.
Weaker employment in the oil-producing provinces will weigh on income, consumption and housing activity in those areas.
Once the downward adjustment to production and employment in the oil sector is complete, the Bank anticipates that growth differentials will narrow across regions.
Heading into 2016, improving labour market conditions will support consumer spending, with consumption expected to grow at roughly the same rate as disposable income.
As a result, the savings rate is expected to remain relatively stable at above pre-crisis levels.
Both new construction and resale activity are very strong in British Columbia and Ontario, while they remain low in Quebec and the Atlantic provinces.
The strength in British Columbia and Ontario appears to reflect local demand stimulated by historically low interest rates, as well as demand from foreign investors and recent immigrants.
In contrast, weakness in the resource economy is affecting housing activity in the Prairie provinces, where resale activity has pulled back sharply in the past six months, and new construction has also begun to slow.
In the near term, the shift in interprovincial migration flows in response to the oil price shock could reinforce some of the recent divergence in housing market activity across provinces.
The Bank continues to anticipate a constructive evolution in the housing market, with housing activity expected to moderate over 2015 before stabilizing through 2016 and 2017 as the economy gains strength and household borrowing rates begin to normalize.
Core inflation is expected to remain near 2 per cent throughout the projection period as the upward pressures from exchange rate pass-through largely offset downward pressures from excess supply.
Based on the assumption of a Canadian dollar at 80 cents US, the Bank estimates that the effects from exchange rate pass-through peak at 0.4 to 0.6 percentage points in the third quarter of 2015 before gradually fading through the end of 2016.
The trajectory for core inflation is little changed from April, since the additional downward pressures on inflation from a wider output gap are largely offset by an upward revision to the estimated impact from exchange rate pass-through.
Total CPI inflation is expected to remain below 2 per cent until early 2016, reflecting weak year-over-year gasoline price inflation.
Thereafter, total CPI inflation will converge to and track the projection for core inflation.
Once the economy reaches and stabilizes at full capacity in the first half of 2017, total CPI inflation and core inflation will remain at 2 per cent on a sustained basis.
The forecast for 2015 is 1.1 per cent, close to recent inflation data.
Results from the summer Business Outlook Survey show that almost all firms anticipate that total CPI inflation will be within the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range over the next two years.
The survey finding that roughly two-thirds of firms anticipate that total CPI inflation will be in the bottom half of the range reflects the evolution of energy prices: many firms cited weaker oil prices as the main driver of their inflation expectations.
The most important risks to inflation are the following: Based largely on industry announcements of capital expenditure plans, the Bank projects a substantial decline in investment in the oil and gas sector in 2015.
However, considerable uncertainty remains around the future path for oil prices and how firms' investment plans will evolve as they adapt their business models to a low-price environment.
In particular, if prices remain at current low levels for an extended period, or fall further, firms may adjust their spending plans downward yet again.
After a broad-based pickup in 2014, non-energy goods exports have fallen since the beginning of this year, with some export categories that are expected to lead the recovery failing to regain momentum.
The underperformance of these categories may merely reflect data volatility and longer lags in the effects of the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar against the US dollar.
However, it could also be indicative of more fundamental competitiveness challenges.
For example, Canadian competitiveness in the US market may not have improved relative to exporters from regions such as Mexico and the euro area, whose currencies have also depreciated against the US dollar.
Firms may also be responding to greater foreign demand by expanding their offshore production capacity.
In addition, a slowdown in China's economy that is more pronounced than expected and the corresponding spillovers to China's trading partners would affect Canada, not only through the demand for Canadian exports, but also through the downward pressure it would put on commodity prices.
Housing activity registered stronger-than-expected growth in the first quarter of 2015, especially in the Greater Toronto and Vancouver areas, and recent indicators suggest continued momentum.
Persistent strength in housing would provide a near-term boost to economic activity, but it would also further exacerbate existing imbalances in the household sector and increase the likelihood and potential severity of a correction later on.
In addition, the vulnerability associated with household indebtedness remains important and is expected to edge higher in the near term in response to the ongoing negative impact on incomes from the sharp decline in oil prices and a projected increase in the level of household debt.
Although the most likely scenario is one in which these imbalances unwind gradually as the economic recovery gains traction, a disorderly unwinding, should it materialize, could have sizable negative effects on the economy.
Stronger-than-expected private domestic demand in the United States represents an important upside risk to inflation in Canada.
The US labour market has improved significantly over the past year.
Together with high levels of consumer confidence and the boost from lower oil prices, this could generate an acceleration in household spending.
This increased demand would encourage businesses to raise hiring and investment, sparking a virtuous circle of higher US private domestic demand.
Robust US activity would generate positive spillovers to growth in the rest of the world, supporting the recovery in the euro area, boosting global confidence more generally and raising demand for Canada's non-energy exports.
Global economic growth remains modest as the world economy is undergoing significant shifts.
The US economy is in a solid expansion, and the recovery is gradually progressing in other advanced economies.
At the same time, growth prospects have softened in a number of emerging-market economies - the main engine of global growth over the past several years.
While global growth is still expected to pick up, it is on a lower trajectory than anticipated in the July Monetary Policy Report.
The declines in the prices of oil and other commodities have changed the terms of trade across commodity-importing and commodity-exporting regions.
Exchange rates have responded to these developments and should help to facilitate global economic adjustments and rebalance demand growth.
Economic performance is nevertheless expected to remain uneven as economies adapt and the composition of economic activity shifts within and across regions.
As financial markets reassess global growth prospects, and amidst uncertainty about the timing and pace of the normalization of US monetary policy, certain asset classes have been repriced and measures of market volatility have increased.
Despite this recent deterioration in market sentiment and tighter financial conditions for many EMEs, financial conditions in advanced economies remain broadly accommodative.
After weak activity in 2015, global economic growth is expected to strengthen over 2016-17.
Monetary policy easing by a number of central banks, together with the positive effects of low oil prices, is providing support for this pickup in growth.
Nevertheless, persistent weakness in global business investment and slow progress in implementing structural reforms in a number of economies are dampening the growth of potential output.
Against this backdrop, robust growth in private domestic demand in the United States - Canada's main trading partner - is driving stronger foreign demand for Canadian exports.
The US economy is expected to grow at a solid pace, driven by strong growth in private domestic demand.
Housing market indicators have reached post-recession highs, and motor vehicle sales are near record levels.
The US labour market has also continued to improve.
Job gains have averaged close to 200,000 per month so far in 2015, and the unemployment rate has fallen.
A strengthening labour market (particularly for youth), an easing of mortgage credit conditions and low interest rates are expected to stimulate household formation and residential construction.
Strong household demand and low borrowing rates should support solid growth in business investment over the next two years.
Investment in oil structures declined by 35 per cent in the first half of 2015, and the recent further decline in oil prices is expected to lead to more reductions in oil-related investment over the near term.
Meanwhile, data on retail sales suggest that the anticipated positive effects of lower oil prices have started to emerge.
The net positive effects of lower oil prices on the growth of US gross domestic product are likely to rise through 2016.
The Federal Reserve has indicated that it is likely to begin the gradual process of normalizing monetary policy, contingent on further improvement in the labour market and rising inflation.
Against this background, weaker growth prospects in China and other EMEs have contributed to an appreciation of the US dollar.
Exchange rate adjustments, in turn, should facilitate some rebalancing of global growth, dampening net exports and growth in the United States and strengthening them in other economies.
In the euro area and Japan, ongoing monetary policy easing, past currency depreciation and low oil prices are supporting modest growth in economic activity.
While European authorities have made some progress on reforms to address structural weaknesses and financial vulnerabilities, progress in Japan has been more limited, suggesting lower projected potential and actual output growth than previously assumed.
In an environment of persistent economic slack and weak commodity prices, inflation remains subdued across advanced economies and in many cases has been well below national targets for an extended period.
The Chinese economy continues to undergo a major structural transition, including greater reliance on consumer spending and less on investment as an engine of economic growth.
This maturation of China's growth model entails an easing of growth to a slower and more sustainable pace over the projection period.
As structural reforms are implemented during this period, it is anticipated that investment will moderate further, while consumption as a share of GDP will increase.
China's housing market is showing early signs of stabilization, following a significant correction.
Housing market fundamentals suggest that construction activity will remain more subdued than expected at the time of the July Report, which has led the Bank to revise down its outlook for China.
Growth is nonetheless expected to average just over 6 per cent in 2016 and 2017.
Despite the slowing in economic growth, China's demand for raw materials has continued to expand.
For example, Chinese imports of copper ore over the first nine months of 2015 rose by 760,000 tonnes relative to the same period last year (to total imports of 9.4 million tonnes so far in 2015) and compared with average annual increases of 710,000 tonnes between 2000 and 2014.
This slowdown reflects a number of factors, including the effects of lower prices for non-energy commodities, spillovers from the slowdown in China, particular weakness in some countries and tighter financial conditions.
Structural factors, such as supply-side bottlenecks and excessive regulatory hurdles, also help account for the modest growth in these economies.
While some oil-importing EMEs have benefited from improved terms of trade, many others that are also exporters of non-energy commodities have seen their terms of trade deteriorate or show little change.
Brazil has experienced a sharp decline, which, together with structural challenges, has contributed to a deep downturn in 2015 and a marked depreciation of its currency.
Growth in oil-importing EMEs is expected to strengthen over 2016 and 2017.
Contributing factors include the following: an easing of cyclical downturns in a few economies, realization of lagged benefits from lower oil prices and increased traction from needed structural reforms.
Recent depreciations in real exchange rates will support net trade.
Growth in emerging Asia in particular is expected to pick up, largely reflecting the vigour of the Indian economy where growth, which has averaged close to 7 per cent over the past two years, should strengthen further.
More generally, EMEs have become more resilient over time, reflecting progress in restructuring their economies, strengthening their fiscal positions, building sounder financial systems, increasing their buffers of foreign exchange reserves and moving toward greater exchange rate flexibility.
In the rest of the world, growth slowed markedly this year as oil-exporting countries saw their terms of trade deteriorate with falling oil prices.
Growth in these economies is expected to recover as the drag from lower oil prices diminishes and the positive effects of exchange rate adjustments, the pickup in global growth and lower energy costs become predominant.
The global implications of a lower growth path in China and other EMEs, combined with uncertainty over the timing and pace of US monetary policy normalization, have led to greater volatility and risk aversion in financial markets around the world.
These developments have been reflected in tighter credit conditions across a broad range of markets.
Equity prices have declined globally, particularly in China, and have become more volatile.
High-yield and emerging-market corporate spreads have moved up sharply, with the former driven primarily by the commodity sector, given the further weakness in oil and other commodity prices.
Long-term government bond yields in advanced economies remain low and have edged down further since July.
Greater headwinds from EMEs, tighter financial conditions and below-target inflation have pushed back market expectations for when normalization of US monetary policy will begin.
The European Central Bank has signalled that the current asset purchase program could be expanded, if necessary.
Markets anticipate further monetary policy easing by the Bank of Japan in the face of disappointing economic performance.
Authorities in China are expected to maintain accommodative monetary and fiscal policies to guard against a sharper cyclical slowdown.
Despite the recent delay in market-implied expectations for the beginning of US policy normalization, divergence in expected monetary policy paths and greater uncertainty about external developments have contributed to the overall strength in the US dollar over the past year.
Emerging-market currencies have depreciated and have become more volatile since the July Report.
In a context of lower commodity prices and the stronger US dollar, the Canadian dollar and the currencies of Canadian competitors in the US market, such as Mexico, have depreciated against the US dollar in recent months.
While US oil production peaked in April 2015, International Energy Agency forecasts suggest that global production is expected to continue to exceed demand until at least the second half of 2016.
Cost-cutting initiatives by oil producers have allowed some high-cost production to continue, contributing to a rapid increase in global oil inventories.
At the same time, recent developments in China and other EMEs have led to a perception that future growth in the demand for oil could be weaker.
The per barrel prices for Brent, West Texas Intermediate and Western Canada Select in US dollars have recently averaged roughly $50, $45 and $30, respectively.
This profile is about $15 to $20 lower than in the July Report.
There are both upside and downside risks to the Bank's oil price assumption.
On the downside, for example, the anticipated return of Iranian oil production, if not offset by production cuts elsewhere in the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries , could delay the rebalancing of the market.
On the upside, US production over the next year could decline by more than expected.
Survey evidence suggests that many US oil producers are facing financial strain.
If companies encounter challenges in raising sufficient cash to maintain capital expenditures, the resulting drop in production could rebalance the market more quickly than anticipated.
Oil prices may also be driven higher by geopolitical developments, as has been the case more recently with heightened tensions associated with the conflict in Syria.
Over time, as excess inventories decline and eventually disappear, new production, including some from higher-cost resources, will need to come online to meet rising demand.
The Bank's non-energy commodity price index has fallen by about 10 per cent since the July Report and is now more than 25 per cent below its peak in 2011.
While China is one of the world's largest consumers of several commodities and its demand remains high, expectations of a slower growth trajectory in the future have put downward pressure on prices, especially for base metals.
The declines in prices of agricultural products and forestry products since July have been larger than for base metals because demand effects were compounded by stronger-than-expected supply growth.
Largely offsetting forces are expected to keep the Bank's non-energy commodity price index near its recent levels.
The anticipated strengthening in the global economy should put upward pressure on non-energy commodity prices.
In particular, the improving US housing market is likely to lend rising support for the demand for lumber.
In addition, the urbanization process in China and other EMEs will continue to boost demand for, and prices of, base metals.
However, global production capacity for some commodities continues to expand, aided in part by lower fuel input costs, putting further downward pressure on prices.
On the one hand, Canada's exports should benefit from the strength of the US economy.
Components of US demand that are important for Canadian exports, such as business investment in equipment, housing and consumption, are expected to grow at a solid pace.
On the other hand, commodity producers in Canada face lower prices for oil and non-energy commodities.
In this context, the Canadian dollar has depreciated since the July Report.
By convention, the Canadian dollar is assumed to be close to its recent average level of 76 cents over the projection horizon, lower than the 80 cents assumed in July.
The Canadian economy continues to adjust to lower prices for oil and other commodities.
The required reallocation of labour and capital across sectors and regions is a complex process that will take time to unfold, particularly in view of the need to rebuild non-commodity-exporting capacity.
Several important factors are helping to facilitate these adjustments.
The stimulative effects of previous monetary policy easing are working their way through the Canadian economy, supporting household spending in particular.
Non-commodity exports are being boosted by solid growth in the US economy.
In addition, the depreciation of the Canadian dollar associated with the decline in commodity prices is improving Canada's international competitiveness, increasing net exports.
Economic activity and inflation in Canada are evolving largely as expected in the July Report.
Economic momentum is rebuilding, and real GDP growth is estimated to have rebounded to about 2 per cent in the second half of 2015, following a modest contraction in the first half of the year.
On an average annual basis, real GDP is expected to grow by just over 1 per cent this year, before firming to about 2 per cent in 2016 and about 2 1/2 per cent in 2017.
Since July, the Bank has marked down modestly its projection for economic activity in 2016-17, in response to the further decline in the prices for oil and other commodities and the additional downgrade of investment intentions by energy firms.
While there is considerable uncertainty around projections for potential output, particularly over the medium term, the sharp reduction in investment associated with the commodity price shock suggests that near-term growth in potential output is now more likely to be in the lower part of the range of estimates presented by the Bank in April.
Given this judgment, the Canadian economy can be expected to return to potential around mid-2017.
If, for other reasons, the rate of potential output growth turned out to be faster, the output gap could close somewhat later and the inflation path could be slightly lower.
Core inflation is expected to remain near 2 per cent throughout the projection horizon as the upward pressure from exchange rate pass-through roughly offsets the downward pressure from excess supply, with both effects diminishing over time.
Total CPI inflation is expected to remain in the lower half of the inflation-control range until 2017, reflecting weak year-over-year gasoline price inflation.
Once the economy reaches and stabilizes at full capacity, total CPI inflation and core inflation will remain at 2 per cent on a sustained basis.
Core inflation, as measured by CPIX, is close to 2 per cent.
Prices of products with a high import content have increased with the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar, providing a temporary boost to inflation.
The pass-through of the depreciation is estimated to be contributing about 0.5 to 0.7 percentage points to core inflation in 2015Q3.
Pass-through is particularly pronounced in core goods such as appliances, clothing, reading material and some food products.
These temporary effects on inflation are offsetting the disinflationary pressure from economic slack.
The underlying trend in inflation is estimated to be about 1.5 per cent to 1.7 per cent.
Total CPI inflation is slightly above 1 per cent, since year-over-year decreases in consumer energy prices continue to weigh on inflation.
Total CPI inflation would have been even lower if gasoline prices had more closely tracked developments in oil prices this year.
However, this relationship has weakened in recent months, both in Canada and the United States, reflecting increased demand for gasoline and insufficient refinery capacity.
The insufficient capacity is exacerbated by major refinery outages on the US west coast and in the Midwest.
Production in oil and gas related industries declined by 8 per cent between the fourth quarter of 2014 and the second quarter of 2015, while business investment linked to these industries fell sharply.
Not surprisingly, these developments affected household expenditures in the energy-producing regions.
For example, motor vehicle sales and housing activity have been well below the national average.
Altogether, it is estimated that the oil price shock subtracted about 1 1/4 percentage points from growth in the first half of the year.
While the non-resource sector continued to expand, it was not enough to offset the sharp adjustment coming from the oil sector.
Moreover, activity was restrained by temporary factors, including severe winter weather in North America and temporary shutdowns in the auto and oil and gas sectors.
Real GDP is expected to rebound in the second half of the year as the impact of the oil price shock on growth in the oil and gas sectors moderates and the rest of the economy strengthens, supported by previous monetary policy easing and the lower value of the Canadian dollar.
In particular, production in the non-resource sector is expected to increase as foreign demand for Canadian exports strengthens.
Meanwhile, the resilience in employment outside the resource sector is likely to continue to support household expenditures.
Indeed, even in the second quarter, there was evidence of renewed momentum: excluding the drag on real GDP growth associated with the change in inventory investment, final sales expanded by 0.7 per cent, compared with a 1.8 per cent drop in the first quarter.
Activity in the second half of the year will also be initially boosted by the unwinding of the temporary negative factors that affected the first half of 2015 and the positive impact on consumption of the retroactive payments of the Universal Child Care Benefit.
Growth in the second half of the year is expected to average close to 2 per cent, despite the ongoing but moderating drag from the resource sector.
For 2015 as a whole, the decline in oil prices is estimated to subtract about three-quarters of a percentage point from growth, in line with previous expectations.
Estimates from the Bank's two measures of the output gap (the structural and statistical approaches) point to a notable widening during the first half of 2015, which is persisting in the second half.
Labour market data indicate continued slack, and there is little evidence of mounting wage pressures.
The national unemployment rate has risen slightly in recent months, while the Bank's labour market indicator ticked up in September.
Given the magnitude of the commodity price shock, the Canadian labour market is nonetheless showing some resilience.
Over the past year, the Canadian economy has added about 160,000 net new jobs (with full-time employment increasing by about 200,000 and part-time employment decreasing by about 40,000); the total number of hours worked has grown by 1.3 per cent, about double the estimated trend pace of growth; and the prime-age participation rate has rebounded by 0.7 percentage points.
As expected, national indicators mask diverging trends in developments among the energy-producing provinces and the rest of the country.
Disaggregated data show that additional slack is developing in some regions, with little change in others.
Since last November, the unemployment rate in the energy-producing provinces has risen markedly, while it has remained roughly flat, on average, across others.
The Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey indicates that capacity pressures eased noticeably in the third quarter, reflecting the further propagation of the effects of lower commodity prices.
Responses show that capacity pressures in the Prairie provinces have eased significantly, continuing a recent trend.
Responses for the other provinces suggest that excess capacity has gradually diminished over the past few years but may have widened more recently in response to weaker demand.
The contraction in the first half of the year points to weak domestic demand conditions, but because of the sharp declines in investment, it also has negative implications for potential output.
Overall, the Bank judges that the amount of excess capacity widened substantially during the first half of 2015 and has remained material in the second half, at between 1 and 2 per cent.
The Canadian economy is undergoing a complex set of adjustments.
A prolonged period of deteriorating competitiveness, punctuated by the Great Recession, led to the destruction of many firms and depressed business investment outside the energy sector, resulting in significantly reduced capacity in the non-resource sector.
It is in this context that the Canadian economy has to adjust to lower commodity prices.
From a macroeconomic point of view, full adjustment is expected to take several years, since investment, including through the creation of new firms, is needed to build the capacity to absorb the reallocated labour into the non-resource sector.
Household expenditures will also take a long time to adjust and will depend on the ultimate impact of the lower terms of trade on national wealth and labour income.
While the adjustment is still in its early stages, there are already signs of the reallocation of labour and capital.
Looking first to labour markets, the job vacancy rate in the oil-producing provinces has fallen sharply since the autumn of 2014, while it has increased in the rest of Canada since March of this year.
On the supply side, net total migration to Alberta and Saskatchewan from the rest of Canada and international locations slowed to about 11,000 on average per quarter in the first half of this year, less than half of the strong pace of about 24,000 recorded between 2012 and 2013.
Firms are starting to adjust through a variety of mechanisms: in the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey, some firms that are part of the oil and gas supply chain reported reorienting their client base following declining sales.
Other firms are adapting by restructuring and refocusing their efforts, in some cases amid an ongoing consolidation in their industry, for example, through innovation or by developing their online sales.
Growth in the population of firms in the economy has been on a gradual upward trend since late 2012, but recent developments indicate divergence across industries.
The number of firms in the mining, quarrying, and oil and gas extraction industries contracted by 1.1 per cent (year-over-year) in the first quarter of this year and 3.0 per cent in the second quarter.
Outside this sector, growth in the population of firms picked up during these quarters.
Overall, while investment spending in the oil and gas extraction industries is expected to continue to decline for several quarters, strengthening activity in the non-resource sector should underpin solid growth through the adjustment process.
Real GDP is expected to increase by about 2 per cent in 2016 and about 2 1/2 per cent in 2017.
This projection incorporates a further decline in the prices for oil and other commodities since July, which has resulted in a downward revision to business investment and exports.
While the adverse impact of these shocks on GDP raises the risk that the output gap could take longer to close than previously expected, the weaker investment profile suggests that potential output growth in the near term is more likely to be in the lower part of the Bank's range of estimates.
Overall, there is much uncertainty about the magnitude and timing of the effects of the commodity price shock on potential output, particularly over the medium term.
In addition to the direct impact of weaker investment, potential output is affected by the reallocation of resources across sectors.
The costs associated with structural reallocation imply that the level and growth rate of potential output could be weaker.
Other dampening factors include the shifting of production away from relatively high-productivity resource extraction industries and costs associated with relocating or retraining labour, including implicit costs such as temporary underemployment and increased numbers of discouraged workers.
However, innovation and the exit of low-productivity firms could contribute to higher potential output.
Canadian financial conditions remain highly accommodative.
Reductions in the policy rate in January and July have helped to offset some of the global tightening of financial conditions.
For example, 10-year government bond yields in Canada have declined modestly since the July Report and are about 50 basis points lower than their average level in the fourth quarter of 2014.
Similarly, effective borrowing rates for both households and businesses remain at or near historically low levels.
Mortgage rates are at record lows, both for fixed - and variable-rate mortgages, and growth in mortgage credit has picked up.
Nevertheless, credit conditions in some segments of the economy have deteriorated recently in an environment of increased market volatility and with a decline in the valuations of risky assets globally.
Notably, credit spreads on corporate bonds for financial and non-financial issuers have increased, particularly for issuers in the energy and resource sectors.
Business credit growth has slowed in recent months, to a rate approaching the historical average.
The weaker loan creation is consistent with results from the Bank's latest Senior Loan Officer Survey, which indicate that non-price lending conditions continue to tighten in the oil sector.
Results from the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey also point to a tightening of credit conditions, particularly in regions and sectors that are adversely affected by the oil price shock.
Commodity exports are expected to increase at a moderate pace over the projection horizon.
Similarly, expectations of low prices and competitiveness issues will weigh on activity in the mining and related sectors (particularly for intermediate metal products).
In contrast, lumber exports should benefit from an improving US housing market, and agricultural exports are projected to pick up in response to increasing global demand for food and a bounce back in production after the 2015 drought.
Following a rebound in recent months, non-commodity exports are expected to grow at a solid pace, boosted by the strong growth in US private domestic demand and the depreciation of the Canadian dollar.
Export growth is being led by components sensitive to the exchange rate, roughly two-thirds of which are showing positive momentum and are significantly outperforming those that are less exchange rate sensitive.
On the services side, travel services have been particularly robust, supported by the lower Canadian dollar.
The number of international visitors to Canada has picked up, while the number of Canadians going abroad has declined noticeably.
Bank analysis shows that many of the categories of exports that were expected to lead the recovery have maintained momentum.
These industries are expected to contribute materially to Canada's export performance.
Drawing across all export categories, more granular analysis reveals new sources of export growth (such as steel forms and some food products), which rose from essentially zero in 2010 to more than $500 million in total in 2014.
While these new sales constitute only a small proportion of overall exports, they demonstrate that many Canadian firms can adapt to changing economic circumstances.
The Bank's projection for exports is supported by results from its latest Business Outlook Survey.
For many firms, particularly in the manufacturing sector, stronger US growth prospects have translated into an improved sales outlook.
Some exporters cited the lower Canadian dollar as boosting margins on sales in US dollars and having a positive impact on export sales volumes by improving price competitiveness.
Business investment is expected to continue to restrain real GDP over the next year or so.
However, recent developments have led firms in the energy sector to further reduce their expectations for oil prices over the near to medium term.
To better position their balance sheets and improve cash flow as hedges against price declines expire and financial conditions tighten, oil firms are cutting operating costs and reducing capital expenditures.
The latter are now expected to decline well into 2016.
As a result, the Bank has revised down its projected profile for investment in the oil and gas sector in both 2016 and 2017, a risk that the Bank had identified in July.
On an average annual basis, investment in that sector is now projected to decline by about 20 per cent in 2016 and to remain roughly flat in 2017.
The Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey found that forward-looking indicators of business activity have improved, including firms' intentions to invest.
Firms anticipating a boost from the improving US economy, among them many manufacturing firms, tend to experience higher capacity pressures and plan to invest and hire more than other firms.
In this context, a gradual rebound in investment in machinery and equipment and in non-residential buildings is expected, while weakness in engineering spending associated with the resource sector should persist.
Although financial conditions have tightened for some firms, notably those tied to the energy sector, they continue to be favourable for investment spending, even though the lower Canadian dollar has raised the cost of imported machinery and equipment.
For many exporters, the lower exchange rate has boosted margins and cash flow expressed in Canadian dollars.
While the further deterioration in the terms of trade and associated income and wealth prospects will have a dampening effect, a resilient labour market will help to support demand growth.
The lower dollar will shift domestic consumption, including travel spending, toward domestically produced goods and services.
Housing market activity across regions, in terms of sales, starts and price growth, continues to be characterized by trifurcation: markets in British Columbia and Ontario have maintained their strength, Alberta and Saskatchewan are experiencing further weakness, and activity in the rest of Canada has been soft.
Lower mortgage rates are contributing to strong growth in mortgage credit, especially in British Columbia and Ontario.
The lower household borrowing rates are also supporting other forms of consumer credit growth and spending.
As a result, the overall ratio of debt to disposable income has edged higher.
Looking ahead, the housing market and household indebtedness are expected to stabilize over the projection period as the economy gains strength and household borrowing rates begin to normalize.
Core inflation is expected to remain near 2 per cent throughout the projection period as the upward pressure from exchange rate pass-through roughly offsets downward pressure from excess supply.
Based on the assumption of a Canadian dollar at 76 cents US, the Bank estimates that the effects on inflation from exchange rate pass-through will peak at 0.5 to 0.7 percentage points in the second half of 2015 before gradually fading through 2016.
Given the importance of exchange rate pass-through, the forecast for core inflation can vary materially under different assumptions for the Canadian dollar.
Total CPI inflation is expected to remain below 2 per cent until the beginning of 2017, reflecting weak year-over-year gasoline price inflation.
The profile for total CPI inflation is somewhat lower in 2016 than was projected in July, owing to the lower assumed prices for crude oil.
The projected gradual return to a more typical relationship between gasoline and crude oil prices also puts downward pressure on gasoline prices and total CPI inflation well into 2016.
There is considerable uncertainty around the profile for total CPI inflation: oil prices are very volatile, and the historical relationship between gasoline and crude oil prices may not assert itself as quickly as assumed in the base-case projection.
For example, if the base-case scenario assumed that oil prices were 10 per cent higher, total CPI inflation would be higher by about 0.3 percentage points over the coming year.
To illustrate the interaction of these sources of uncertainty, an alternative scenario is considered in Chart 34: oil prices are assumed to be 10 per cent higher and margins continue at their current level until the end of the projection period.
Under these assumptions, total CPI inflation remains close to 2 per cent throughout the projection horizon.
Once the economy reaches and stabilizes at full capacity around mid-2017, total CPI inflation and core inflation will remain at 2 per cent on a sustained basis.
A semi-annual question on long-term forecasts that is part of CE's October survey shows inflation forecasts averaging 2.0 per cent through 2025, providing evidence of well-anchored long-term inflation expectations.
Results from the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey indicate that a large majority of firms expect CPI inflation to remain within the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range over the next two years.
Many respondents expecting inflation to be in the lower half of that range cited a lack of momentum in domestic demand and lower oil prices as the main drivers.
After weakness earlier in the year, non-commodity exports have shown renewed momentum, boosted by the firming of US economic growth and the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar.
For example, the competitiveness of Canadian firms in the US market may not improve materially relative to that of exporters from other regions, whose currencies have also depreciated against the US dollar.
Firms may also be responding to greater foreign demand by expanding their offshore production capacity rather than exporting from Canada.
In the oil and gas sector, there is still considerable uncertainty around firms' adjustment to the lower price environment.
If price expectations remain low or fall further, firms may revise their spending plans downward yet again.
Housing activity remains robust, especially in the Greater Toronto and Vancouver areas.
At the same time, consumption has been resilient, despite the shock to incomes from lower commodity prices.
Persistent strength in household spending would provide a near-term boost to economic activity, but it would also further exacerbate existing imbalances in the household sector, increasing the likelihood and potential severity of a correction later on.
Vulnerabilities in the household sector are continuing to edge higher.
Although the most likely scenario is one in which these imbalances unwind gradually as the economy improves, a disorderly unwinding, such as one that might be triggered by further weakness in the resource sector or a rapid rise in global interest rates, could have sizable negative effects on the economy.
In this context, there is a risk that markets could revise these expectations significantly based on incoming data, leading to an upward adjustment in non-energy commodity prices and Canada's terms of trade.
The strong pickup in US private domestic demand could trigger a larger-than-expected increase in business investment as firms become more confident about economic prospects.
Consumer confidence could also strengthen further with improvements in employment and income prospects, resulting in greater acceleration in household spending.
The subsequent boost to private demand could generate positive spillovers to growth in the rest of the world, lifting global confidence more generally and raising demand for Canada's exports.
Financial conditions have tightened in EMEs, and volatility has risen since July as markets have reassessed the growth prospects in these economies.
Financial conditions could deteriorate further, for example, in the event of an outsized market reaction to the expected normalization of US monetary policy or more significant financial stress in China.
The ensuing financial market turmoil could expose debt risks in those EMEs that have issued significant amounts of sovereign and corporate debt denominated in US dollars, leading to a further tightening in financial conditions and greater volatility.
Diverging economic prospects and shifting terms of trade continue to be dominant themes in the global economic outlook.
The US Federal Reserve has started the process of gradually withdrawing exceptional monetary stimulus, reflecting further improvement in labour market conditions and its judgment that inflation will rise to its 2 per cent objective over the medium term.
In contrast, other major central banks have maintained or expanded monetary stimulus in response to persistent economic slack and subdued inflation.
China is continuing its transition to more sustainable growth.
Prices of both energy and non-energy commodities have declined further, to their lowest levels in over a decade.
Lower oil prices are driving major adjustments across the world economy and, over time, should provide a net boost to global economic activity.
Meanwhile, exchange rates are helping to redistribute global demand.
Against this background, the global economy is expected to resume a strengthening trend over the next two years, supported by ongoing monetary policy stimulus and low oil prices.
Contractionary pressures in certain emerging-market economies are also expected to ease.
Nonetheless, persistent weakness in global business investment and slow progress in implementing structural reforms in a number of economies continue to limit the growth of potential output.
The outlook for global growth is broadly in line with the projection in the October Monetary Policy Report, although the composition of US GDP growth is expected to be somewhat less favourable for Canadian exports in 2016.
Recent data indicate a softening for the fourth quarter that is not expected to persist, given strong underlying fundamentals.
Labour income has benefited from robust employment gains, which averaged 221,000 per month over 2015.
Responses to business surveys suggest that a growing number of firms plan to raise wages over the next three months.
Improving labour income and lower gasoline prices have supported private domestic demand, as reflected in near-record-high vehicle sales, robust residential construction and strong business investment outside the commodity-related sectors.
The softness in the fourth quarter of 2015 reflects, in part, the effects of temporary factors (e.g., a sharp weather-related decline in utilities consumption, new mortgage regulations) as well as slower growth in some areas of the economy that had been strong in the first three quarters of the year.
The Bank expects the US economy to grow at close to 2 1/2 per cent over 2016 and 2017, with private domestic demand buttressed by the improving labour market, low gasoline prices and still-low interest rates.
The headwinds from the global economy are expected to diminish over the projection horizon.
While lower oil prices are providing some boost to consumption, recent data suggest that consumers are saving more of their income gains than expected.
Lower commodity prices are also expected to lead to even weaker US investment in the oil and mining sectors during 2016, a factor that is significant for Canadian exports.
Accommodative monetary policy, low oil prices and past exchange rate depreciations are expected to underpin continued expansions in the euro area and Japan.
The European Central Bank announced further monetary easing in December, while the Bank of Japan made adjustments to improve the effectiveness of its existing quantitative easing program.
Nevertheless, growth in these economies is anticipated to remain relatively modest, restrained by weak investment and structural factors.
China's economy continues its shift toward a more sustainable pace and composition of economic growth, with greater reliance on market forces.
While this shift is expected to be successful, the process will be protracted and may involve some volatility.
Chinese equities saw large declines at the beginning of 2016, reflecting the market's reaction to a combination of technical factors and economic information.
These declines are expected to have little direct impact on Chinese GDP growth, since equities make up a small proportion of household assets and play only a limited role in corporate finance in China.
However, uncertainties around how smoothly the transition to a more sustainable growth path will take place could affect financial market volatility and capital flows.
GDP growth in China is expected to slow gradually, from just below 7 per cent in 2015 to a little over 6 per cent in 2017.
As the process of rebalancing from manufacturing toward the service sector proceeds, indicators of heavy manufacturing and investment - such as industrial production - will decelerate, while services and consumption indicators should remain solid.
Growth in infrastructure investment is expected to slow but to remain robust through 2017, in line with the Chinese government's stated priority to address ongoing infrastructure needs.
This should continue to help support demand for commodities.
Growth in other oil-importing EMEs slowed in 2015, reflecting the effects of lower prices for non-energy commodities, spillovers from China's slowdown and tighter financial conditions.
Growth in the oil-importing EMEs is projected to pick up as lower oil prices support demand, progress is made on structural reforms and distressed economies gradually improve.
Emerging Asia is expected to remain the key contributor to growth.
Notably, GDP growth in India will likely remain in the 7 to 8 per cent range through 2017, supported by some progress on policy reforms and lower commodity prices.
In the rest of the world, economic growth in oil-exporting countries is also expected to recover over 2016 and 2017, following the sharp oil-related slowdown in 2015.
However, lower oil prices relative to those at the time of the October Report have led to a downward revision to the outlook for GDP growth in the rest of the world in 2016.
Some of the downside risks to oil prices identified in recent Monetary Policy Reports have materialized.
The global price of crude oil has fallen by more than US$20 since the October Report, leaving prices about 75 per cent below their peak in June 2014.
The global oil market is expected to gradually rebalance as growth in world demand continues and growth in supply slows.
However, the adjustment is likely to take longer than previously anticipated.
Growth in the demand for oil picked up over 2015, but the degree of excess supply has become progressively larger since the second half of 2014.
Many producers of low-cost conventional oil responded to the initial decline in oil prices by ramping up production, partly to compensate for the loss of oil revenues.
In this context, the lack of agreement on a production quota by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries at its December meeting triggered further price declines, and it now looks less likely that additional Iranian oil supply will be offset by reductions from other OPEC members.
The global oil market is now expected to remain in excess supply into 2017.
The per barrel prices for Brent, West Texas Intermediate and Western Canada Select in US dollars have averaged $37, $36 and $22, respectively, since early December.
Over the near term, the risks to the Bank's assumption for oil prices are still tilted to the downside.
Inventories could increase from already-elevated levels, given forecasts of a warm winter in North America and Europe, planned refinery outages and the potential for Iranian oil to return to the market more quickly than expected.
Geopolitical risks to oil prices over the near term are two-sided: the recent increase in geopolitical tensions in the Middle East could put upward pressure on prices, given the potential for supply disruptions, but it could also exert downward pressure if it prompts increased competition for market share among OPEC members.
In contrast, over the medium term, the risks to oil prices are tilted to the upside.
The significant reductions in oil investment since late 2014 could leave future demand increases unmet, putting upward pressure on prices and drawing investment back into the sector.
The level of prices that would balance the oil market in the medium term is still highly uncertain, particularly since technical improvements and other efficiency gains by oil-producing firms have lowered their costs of production.
Shifting industry expectations of the future level of oil prices, in turn, have an important influence on supply dynamics.
Prices are likely to remain volatile while this protracted process unfolds.
The Bank's non-energy commodity price index has also fallen below the level assumed in October, led by declines in the prices of base metals and agricultural products.
Excess supply persists in the global market for many base metals.
Faced with falling prices, many large international mining companies, especially those producing iron ore and copper, have focused on cutting costs rather than curtailing production.
These companies have also benefited from lower oil prices - a key input into the production process.
Meanwhile, slower growth in Chinese heavy manufacturing and investment (activities that generate strong demand for base metals) and uncertainty about future demand have weighed on prices.
Agricultural prices have also declined, owing to strong supply, while forestry prices are little changed.
The Bank's non-energy commodity price index is expected to remain near its recent levels over the projection horizon.
The current excess supply of base metals suggests that prices may continue to fall modestly until production is cut substantially or growth in demand picks up.
This decline will likely be offset by stronger prices for lumber, driven by further improvements in the US housing market.
The effects of the oil price shock on global economic growth continue to unfold.
The negative impact on oil investment in the United States and oil-exporting economies is materializing more quickly than the positive impact from higher real incomes.
The positive effects on global GDP are expected to become dominant over 2016 and 2017 and to continue beyond 2017.
Businesses are benefiting from a reduction in their production costs, and oil producers are contributing to productivity growth by making efforts to improve their competitiveness in a low price environment.
While some of the global benefits of lower oil prices may not have translated into higher expenditures, they have nevertheless contributed to improving private and public balance sheets in some oil-importing countries, which could support future spending.
In the euro area, this is facilitating ongoing deleveraging.
In a number of emerging markets, including China and India, some fuel prices are regulated, which means the economic benefits of lower prices arise in part through improved government finances.
The differing effects of lower commodity prices on commodity exporters and importers, as well as shifting growth prospects across regions, are contributing to exchange rate movements.
Terms of trade have fallen significantly among some commodity exporters (e.g., Australia, Canada, Mexico and Russia) as commodity prices have declined.
In addition, lower commodity prices and the negative implications for domestic demand in oil-exporting economies have been reflected in substantial depreciations in their real effective exchange rates.
Among commodity importers, exchange rate movements have been more differentiated.
Lower commodity prices are providing support for growth in all of these economies.
Nevertheless, in the euro area, Japan and Sweden, subdued economic recoveries and low inflation have led central banks to provide additional monetary policy easing since mid-2014.
As a result, the currencies of these economies have depreciated notably despite the improvements they have experienced in their terms of trade.
Meanwhile, the US dollar has appreciated.
Exchange rate movements are facilitating a realignment of global activity.
In general, real net exports as a share of real GDP have increased for commodity exporters whose real effective exchange rates have depreciated, while they have contracted for commodity importers whose currencies have appreciated.
The rise in the US dollar has been a drag on GDP growth in the United States through rising imports and slower exports, but it is helping to reallocate some of the growth in US demand to other regions.
Since the October Report, falling commodity prices have led to tighter credit conditions for commodity producers - evident in particular in widening spreads in the high-yield sector, which has a heavy concentration of oil and gas producers.
More recently, there have been sharp moves in a range of global asset prices, particularly global equity and commodities markets, reflecting, at least in part, recent volatility in Chinese capital markets.
The long-awaited start of the US Federal Reserve's gradual process of withdrawing policy stimulus was widely anticipated by markets and therefore had a limited immediate impact on market prices.
While bond yields have fallen globally since early 2016, US short-term bond yields remain above levels in the October Report.
This is in contrast to yields in other advanced economies and reflects the diverging policy stances of central banks.
To forestall inflationary pressures from weaker exchange rates, central banks in several emerging markets responded to the Fed's rate increase by raising their policy rates.
Spreads on US-dollar denominated corporate debt in emerging markets have also risen, albeit modestly.
Given the relative strength of the US economy, the US dollar has appreciated against most currencies.
The strength of the US dollar, together with lower commodity prices, has led to a depreciation of the Canadian dollar since October.
By convention, the Canadian dollar is assumed to be close to its recent average of 72 cents over the projection horizon, compared with the 76 cents assumed in October.
Inflation in Canada is evolving broadly as expected.
Total CPI inflation remains near the bottom of the Bank's inflation-control range, as the downward pressure from declines in consumer energy prices is only partially offset by the temporary boost from the pass-through of the exchange rate depreciation to consumer goods prices.
Most of the core inflation measures monitored by the Bank remain close to 2 per cent, since the positive effects of pass-through and the disinflationary effects of economic slack largely counterbalance each other.
The declines in Canada's terms of trade and in the value of the Canadian dollar over the past year and a half have set in motion complex adjustments, involving significant shifts in economic activity and a reallocation of labour and capital that will continue over the next several years.
In the early stages of this process, the Canadian economy has been evolving along two tracks: in the resource sector, investment is being scaled back in response to much weaker commodity prices, job losses have been significant and production has been curtailed.
Activity in the non-resource sector, meanwhile, has been relatively solid and is expected to be the main source of growth going forward.
A reorientation of the Canadian economy toward the non-resource sector is being facilitated by the ongoing US recovery, the lower Canadian dollar, and accommodative monetary and financial conditions.
National employment has been resilient in the face of job losses in the resource sector.
This resilience, together with low household borrowing costs, has supported household expenditures, underpinning overall demand in Canada.
While vulnerabilities in the household sector continue to edge higher, overall risks to financial stability are largely unchanged.
Real GDP growth is expected to strengthen gradually through the projection horizon, with fourth-quarter-over-fourth-quarter growth of about 2 per cent in 2016 and about 2 1/2 per cent in 2017.
The Bank's projection for activity over 2016-17 has been marked down in response to the additional drop in commodity prices and modestly weaker demand for Canadian non-commodity exports.
The growth trajectory reflects the ongoing adjustment, with the contraction in the resource sector waning and economic activity in the non-resource sector gaining traction.
Given the magnitude and protracted nature of the ongoing structural adjustment, the outlooks for both aggregate demand and potential output are highly uncertain.
The Bank judges that growth in potential output is in the lower part of the range of estimates it presented in the April 2015 Report.
In view of the setback to the economy, the Bank's base-case projection shows the output gap closing later than was anticipated in October, around the end of 2017.
However, the Bank has not yet incorporated into its projection the impact of fiscal measures expected in the next federal budget.
Total CPI inflation is projected to remain well below 2 per cent through 2016, as the downward pressure from weak year-over-year consumer energy price inflation and persistent excess capacity in the economy more than offset the upward pressure from the pass-through of the exchange rate depreciation to consumer goods prices.
Both total and core inflation are expected to be close to 2 per cent in 2017 once the temporary effects on inflation from the decline in gasoline prices and from exchange rate pass-through dissipate and the disinflationary effects of residual excess capacity diminish.
Total CPI inflation edged higher in the second half of 2015 but remains near the bottom of the Bank's inflation-control range, with the sharp drop in consumer energy prices continuing to be the largest source of disinflationary pressures.
At the same time, the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar has been exerting temporary upward pressure on the prices of many imported consumer goods in Canada.
The effects of exchange rate pass-through are particularly pronounced in the prices of fruits and vegetables, as well as in those of core goods such as appliances, clothing, reading material and some other food products.
Aside from these transitory factors, slack in the Canadian economy has continued to be a source of downward pressure on total inflation.
During 2015, despite the downward revisions to expected real GDP growth, total CPI inflation was higher than anticipated.
There were two key factors driving this outcome: the Canadian dollar depreciated relative to earlier assumptions, and gasoline prices were firmer than anticipated.
Although gasoline prices have declined, they have not fallen as much as the reduction in crude oil prices would suggest, based on historical experience.
For example, had gasoline prices more closely tracked developments in oil prices, the level of total CPI would have been 0.6 per cent lower in November 2015.
In addition, the disappointment in real GDP growth was accompanied by a markdown in the assessment of potential output, leaving estimates of the degree of excess capacity in the economy broadly similar.
Most measures of core inflation remain in a narrow range, close to 2 per cent.
Given the persistent slack in the economy, measures of core inflation would be lower without the impact of the exchange rate pass-through.
For example, pass-through is estimated to have boosted CPIX inflation by about 0.5 to 0.7 percentage points in the fourth quarter of 2015, with somewhat less impact on the other measures of core inflation.
Economic activity in Canada rebounded as expected in the third quarter of 2015, despite a further decline in oil prices and in investment in the oil and gas sector.
The non-resource sector continued to expand, supported by a steadily strengthening US economy, the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar and accommodative financial conditions, as well as by some temporary factors.
Export growth firmed significantly, particularly for non-commodity exports, partly due to a short-term boost associated with the full resumption of motor vehicle production at plants that were shut down for retooling in the first half of 2015.
Household expenditures grew modestly, sustained by the resilience in employment outside the resource sector and a temporary lift associated with retroactive Universal Child Care Benefit payments.
The downward revision was driven by three main factors.
First, given important supply-chain linkages between Canada and the United States (e.g., in the oil and gas sector), weaker-than-expected US industrial production likely weighed on Canadian exports.
Second, in the context of declining commodity prices, business investment contracted more than expected.
Third, a number of unanticipated temporary factors, including strikes in the public sector in Quebec and short-term downtime in the mining sector, dragged down economic activity.
Estimates of the Bank's two measures of the output gap - the structural and statistical approaches - point to material and increasing excess capacity in the Canadian economy through 2015.
Labour market data also indicate continued slack, and there is little evidence of wage pressures.
Similarly, the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey reported that the incidence of labour shortages remains low and their intensity continues to trend downward.
Given the magnitude of the commodity price shock, the Canadian labour market has performed relatively well: total employment growth was solid during 2015, with gains outside the resource sector more than offsetting losses in the resource sector; the incidence of involuntary part-time work declined noticeably; and the duration of periods of unemployment has also fallen.
The unemployment rate, however, has increased to 7.1 per cent.
Although net job gains over the past year were concentrated in full-time positions, many of these were in the category of self-employment, which is historically associated with weak economic activity.
Underlying these national indicators are the diverging trends between the energy-producing provinces and the rest of the country, notably the rapid deterioration of labour market conditions in Alberta, as indicated by sharp increases in the unemployment rate and employment insurance claims in that province.
Moreover, employment growth in late 2015 was more modest than the relatively strong performance registered in the first half of the year, suggesting that labour market conditions could be softening, in part as a result of spillovers from the resource sector that are increasingly weighing on the rest of the economy.
Overall, the Bank judges that the amount of excess capacity remained material in the fourth quarter of 2015, between 3/4 and 1 3/4 per cent.
Financing conditions for households and businesses in Canada remain highly stimulative.
Reductions in the Bank's policy interest rate in January and July 2015 contributed importantly to these accommodative financial conditions.
For example, yields on 5-year Government of Canada bonds are now roughly 80 basis points below their average level in December 2014.
However, bank funding costs have been edging up more recently, prompting some financial institutions to increase mortgage rates by about 5 to 15 basis points.
As a result, effective borrowing rates for households, while still low, have risen slightly since the October Report.
While growth in business credit has continued to moderate in recent months, most firms surveyed in the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey still characterized credit as easy or relatively easy to obtain.
Credit spreads have widened on high-yield bonds, reflecting a pickup in market volatility and declines in the valuations of riskier assets globally.
In particular, issuers of corporate debt in the energy and resource sectors are facing higher borrowing costs and tighter credit conditions, based on responses to the Bank's Senior Loan Officer Survey for the fourth quarter of 2015.
The prices for oil and other commodities have declined since October, and the uncertainty around the evolution of prices remains pronounced.
In response, firms in the oil and gas sector have again revised down capital spending plans, a possibility highlighted in the October Report.
Weaker profitability and sharply lower capital expenditures in the oil and gas sector will further reduce production and exports of energy over the medium term.
Likewise, in the non-energy commodity sector, lower prices and competitiveness issues are expected to add to constraints on mining activity.
It is important to note that currently assumed prices for oil are approaching break-even prices on a cash flow (i.e., average variable cost) basis for many producers.
As a result, there are greater downside than upside risks to production and investment stemming from oil price movements.
Some firms have indicated that if prices were to fall further, threshold effects would occur.
A sustained price increase of a given amount might not have a material impact on the investment and production decisions of firms; however, a sustained price decrease of the same amount could force some firms to cease operations, triggering sharp falls in production, investment and employment, and lead to expectations of more consolidation in the industry.
The past depreciation of the Canadian dollar is helping to improve the price competitiveness of Canadian exports and import-competing goods and services, although the currencies of other competing commodity-producing economies, such as Australia, Mexico, Chile and Brazil, have also depreciated relative to the US dollar.
Growth in non-commodity goods exports has been led by components that are sensitive to movements in the Canadian dollar, roughly two-thirds of which are showing positive momentum and are outperforming those that are less exchange rate sensitive.
While the growth of non-energy exports slowed in late 2015, many subcategories of non-energy-commodity and non-commodity goods exports - such as potash, seafood products, and ships, locomotives and rapid transit equipment - showed sizable gains during 2015.
In the services sector, travel services have benefited from the lower Canadian dollar and the resulting change in travel patterns.
The number of international visitors to Canada has picked up, while the number of Canadians going abroad has declined.
The Bank's latest Business Outlook Survey indicated that firms engaged in non-commodity exports are more optimistic about growth in their sales prospects over the coming year than firms that are more oriented toward domestic sales.
In this context, the survey provides continued evidence of firms actively pivoting their sales efforts toward faster-growing foreign markets and highlights the facilitating role played by the lower Canadian dollar.
Business investment is expected to expand starting in the second half of this year as the drag from reductions in spending in the oil and gas sector dissipates.
However, the latest Business Outlook Survey indicated a further deterioration in investment intentions in the Prairies, and weakening is now evident in other regions as well.
Outside the resource sector, investment is expected to strengthen gradually, similar to that already experienced in the United States: in the winter Business Outlook Survey, a number of firms reported that robust exports are leading to stronger spending intentions.
Exporters not tied to commodities have positive investment intentions overall in response to stronger foreign demand and the boost to competitiveness coming from the lower dollar.
As domestic production becomes more competitive, a few firms reported plans to move production back to Canada.
The survey results also indicate that the lower Canadian dollar is helping to support competitiveness for domestically oriented firms.
For instance, tourism-related activity has increased and further gains are expected.
The Business Outlook Survey also highlighted some challenges from the lower Canadian dollar: the majority of firms surveyed face higher costs for imported inputs and investment goods, and some plan to respond by switching from foreign to Canadian suppliers.
This effect will be gradually offset, however, by growth in the non-resource sector, which will help to support labour demand and income and thus household expenditures.
Over the projection horizon, consumption is expected to grow roughly in line with disposable income.
At the same time, as a result of the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar, domestic consumption patterns are expected to shift toward domestically produced goods and services.
Major Canadian housing market indicators remain strong: yearly growth in house prices is robust, sales of existing homes are above their historical average and the recent pace of housing starts exceeds demographic demand.
Strength in national indicators is being driven primarily by elevated activity in two markets - Greater Toronto and Vancouver.
Over the projection horizon, regional divergences in housing activity are expected to gradually fade and the contribution to real GDP growth from residential investment will decline.
Low interest rates and higher house prices have led to strong growth in mortgage credit, recently pushing up the year-over-year growth of overall household credit to 5 per cent.
Looking ahead, despite recent increases, mortgage and consumer borrowing rates are still low and are expected to continue to support mortgage and consumer credit growth.
Consequently, the overall ratio of debt to disposable income will likely edge higher in the near term.
However, as the economy strengthens and household borrowing rates begin to normalize over the projection horizon, the housing market and household indebtedness are expected to stabilize.
This will help reduce the disparity between house price and credit growth on one hand and nominal household income growth on the other.
The drop in commodity prices and its impact on income and wealth will continue to put downward pressure on government revenues.
However, overall, fiscal policy in Canada is expected to provide an increasing contribution to economic growth over the projection horizon.
The Bank's base-case economic scenario reflects the fiscal measures announced since the October Report, notably the increase in expenditures contained in the Alberta budget and changes to federal marginal income tax rates introduced at the beginning of 2016.
Combined, these additional measures are estimated to provide modest support to economic activity, raising the level of real GDP at the end of 2016 by about 0.1 per cent.
The federal government has indicated that further fiscal policy measures are likely to occur.
These measures are not included in the base-case scenario and represent an important upside risk to the outlook.
The nature of this upside risk depends on the timing, size and types of fiscal measures.
In particular, government infrastructure investment tends to generate broader spillovers to the economy and thus is associated with larger multipliers than other forms of government spending or changes in taxes or transfers.
At the same time, infrastructure spending typically involves longer lags between decisions to increase spending and actual expenditures.
On an average annual basis, growth is expected to increase to 1.4 per cent in 2016 before firming to 2.4 per cent in 2017.
The ongoing weakness in investment suggests that potential output growth is more likely to be in the lower part of the Bank's range of estimates presented in the April 2015 Report.
The contraction of investment is expected to end around the middle of 2016.
In the second quarter, real GDP growth is projected to begin to exceed potential growth, leading to a narrowing of the output gap.
In view of the extraordinary uncertainty, in the Bank's base-case projection, the Canadian economy is expected to return to potential later than anticipated in the October Report, around the end of 2017.
Total CPI inflation is expected to remain well below 2 per cent through 2016, as disinflationary pressures associated with weak year-over-year gasoline price inflation and excess capacity in the Canadian economy more than offset the positive effects of exchange rate pass-through on inflation.
The significant disinflationary effect of lower gasoline prices will fade through 2016, although downward pressure associated with a return to a more typical relationship between gasoline and crude oil prices is expected through most of the year.
The Bank estimates that the upward pressure on total CPI inflation from exchange rate pass-through was about 0.9 to 1.1 percentage points in the fourth quarter of 2015.
Based on the assumption of a Canadian dollar at 72 cents US, the effect of pass-through is expected to gradually decline through 2016 and into 2017.
However, given the depreciation of the Canadian dollar in recent months, there is a risk that pass-through will remain higher before declining.
In 2017, the residual upward pressure from pass-through and the modest downward pressure associated with remaining excess capacity will largely counterbalance each other so that total CPI inflation and core inflation are projected to be close to 2 per cent.
Medium-term inflation expectations have continued to be well anchored at 2 per cent.
The January Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation was 1.8 per cent for 2016 and 2.0 per cent for 2017.
While results from the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey indicate that a large majority of firms continued to expect CPI inflation to remain within the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range over the next two years, a greater proportion expected inflation to be in the lower half of that range.
The Bank's base-case projection is consistent with fiscal policy announcements made by federal and provincial governments up to January 2016.
Recent public statements by senior government officials indicate that the upcoming federal budget will include additional fiscal stimulus.
This stimulus will boost domestic demand relative to that in the base-case projection, pulling forward the closing of the output gap.
When more details become available, the Bank will assess the impact of the fiscal package on the outlook for growth.
Aside from the prospective fiscal measures, the Bank's outlook is subject to several risks emanating from both the external environment and the domestic economy.
The Bank judges the following risks to be roughly balanced over the projection horizon.
The commodity price shock has sparked a complex set of structural adjustments within the Canadian economy.
In the resource sector, investment has been sharply curtailed and labour reductions continue.
At the same time, capital and labour are being reallocated to the non-resource sector, a process that will take years to unfold and that has important consequences for the level and growth rate of potential output.
The Bank judges that, to date, the adjustments mean that near-term potential output growth is likely in the lower part of the range of estimates provided in the April 2015 Report.
However, there is considerable uncertainty around assessments of the impact of the commodity price shock on the level and growth rate of potential output.
Consequently, the starting point and expected profile of the output gap may be narrower, posing an upside risk to inflation.
The pass-through from the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar to total inflation is expected to average 0.7 percentage points in 2016.
Given the size and speed of the depreciation, there is a risk that pass-through may be greater than expected based on historical experience.
When a large depreciation occurs over a short period, the pass-through to prices could be relatively rapid and thus have a greater impact on annual inflation.
In such a situation, inflation expectations might increase, posing an upside risk to projected inflation.
Given the magnitude of the oil price decline, it is becoming increasingly likely that important adverse threshold effects on economic activity may occur.
If prices were to fall to a sufficiently low level that a firm had difficulty covering ongoing operating costs (i.e., average variable costs), then not only would investment and employment be affected, but the firm could also stop operating and be forced into bankruptcy.
If a significant part of the industry were affected by thresholds, the resulting negative confidence effects and demand spillovers could weigh heavily on the broader economy.
A number of factors could impair EME growth.
For example, growth in China may slow more than expected while authorities work to rebalance its economy.
Brazil and some other EMEs also could experience weaker growth as they adjust to declines in their terms of trade and higher volatility in capital flows.
The Bank expects global economic growth to strengthen gradually after a weaker-than-expected start to 2016.
Incoming data are consistent with a continuation of modest global growth, as projected in the January Monetary Policy Report.
This flow of data, as well as actions taken by central banks, has supported an improvement in financial conditions by alleviating markets' immediate concerns about the possibility of a pronounced slowdown.
The European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan have provided additional stimulus, while the US Federal Reserve has signalled a slower pace of monetary tightening.
The anticipated firming in global growth, from approximately 3 per cent in 2016 to around 3 1/2 per cent in 2017-18, should be supported by accommodative monetary policy, a slowing rate of contraction in certain emerging-market economies and reforms to promote economic growth in various countries.
Oil prices have been volatile but remain low and continue to affect regions differently.
The adjustment process for commodity exporters is being supported by past exchange rate depreciations, which are helping boost their net exports.
Economic activity in the United States expanded at a modest pace at the end of 2015 and the beginning of 2016.
While US private domestic demand in the latter part of 2015 proved more resilient than anticipated in the January Report, particularly consumption and residential investment, growth is now expected to remain modest in the first quarter of 2016.
The softer start to the year reflects weaker consumer spending in January, additional drag from the oil and gas sector on investment and the lagged effect of a stronger US dollar on exports.
Total GDP growth is projected to firm over 2016, bolstered by underlying strength in labour markets and consumer confidence, low oil prices and still-accommodative monetary policy.
The US labour market averaged monthly job gains of over 200,000 during the first quarter of 2016, a strong pace that has been maintained since March 2014.
There are signs that the strength in employment growth is now helping draw workers back into the labour market: since September 2015, the participation rate has risen steadily, reversing some of the decline seen since the 2007-09 global financial and economic crisis.
Solid fundamentals are expected to support growth of around 2 per cent over the projection horizon.
This is a more moderate pace than projected in the January Report, reflecting the weaker start to 2016 and revised assessments of housing and productivity trends.
Residential investment is expected to expand at a robust pace of 9 per cent per year through 2018, although it has been revised down in light of a reassessment of underlying housing market fundamentals.
This revision reflects a reassessment of the implications of the shift in US housing construction toward multiple-unit housing, which is less investment-intensive, and constrained access to mortgage credit for some borrowers.
The persistent weakness in trend productivity growth also suggests a pace of GDP growth over the forecast horizon that is somewhat slower than previously anticipated.
Inflation has picked up since the fourth quarter of 2015 and is expected to reach 2 per cent by 2018 as labour market slack is gradually absorbed.
Modest economic recoveries in the euro area and Japan are being underpinned by expansionary monetary policy, low oil prices and past exchange rate depreciations.
A number of factors continue to dampen growth and inflation.
In the euro area, growth is being restrained by ongoing deleveraging, weak investor confidence and tight lending conditions.
These factors are being partly offset by an increase in fiscal spending to support the large inflow of refugees.
Meanwhile, in Japan, lacklustre wage growth is restraining consumption.
China continues to pursue a more sustainable growth path for its economy.
The economy is being rebalanced away from investment toward consumption and away from heavy industry toward the service sector, which now accounts for just over 50 per cent of China's GDP.
While the pace of growth is expected to ease gradually, there are challenges inherent in the transition; for example, slower growth raises the possibility that highly leveraged firms could be a source of financial stress.
China's GDP growth is expected to slow from 6.9 per cent in 2015 to 6.3 per cent in 2018 - a decline that is somewhat more gradual than anticipated in the January Report.
Recent fiscal announcements and credit data suggest that the Chinese government is taking measures to support domestic demand growth.
Fiscal stimulus is expected to be focused on additional infrastructure spending and tax relief for businesses.
While this additional policy support should boost growth in the short term, financial vulnerabilities will also increase further if the government's targeted increases in broader credit growth are met.
In other oil-importing EMEs, growth is expected to strengthen as the sharp contractions in economic activity in some economies moderate, the net benefits of lower oil prices accumulate and progress is made on structural reforms, particularly the removal of regulatory obstacles to growth.
Net exports for oil-importing EMEs are also expected to be softer, a result of weaker external demand.
The near-term outlook for oil-importing EMEs is therefore somewhat weaker relative to the January Report.
Growth is expected to pick up in the rest of the world over 2017-18 as the Russian economy stabilizes and other oil-exporting economies adjust to lower oil prices.
While the effects of this adjustment are expected to dissipate, the outlook for the rest of the world is weaker relative to the January Report, reflecting further reductions in investment in the oil sector and additional fiscal cuts announced by some oil exporters.
Although the recent period has been challenging for many EMEs, they have, on the whole, taken measures over the past two decades to improve their ability to withstand economic and financial stresses.
Nonetheless, some pockets of vulnerabilities have intensified, particularly in countries where the decline in commodity prices has exacerbated geopolitical, political and fiscal concerns and in countries with rising US-dollar denominated corporate debt.
While many EMEs are planning further structural reforms to increase their resilience to external shocks and to support growth over the coming years, progress is likely to be uneven.
The estimated growth potential of the global economy has been revised down to about 3 1/4 per cent, on average, over the projection horizon.
The Bank has also lowered its assessment of the growth rate of potential output for the US economy to about 1 3/4 per cent, reflecting productivity growth that has remained lower than anticipated.
While US productivity growth is expected to improve gradually, the ongoing weakness suggests a softer trend than previously estimated.
The persistent sluggishness in global trade and investment in recent years may have also weighed on global productivity growth.
Prices of energy and non-energy commodities remain well below historical averages.
Uncertainty about the nature and speed of supply and demand adjustments is contributing to recent volatility in oil prices.
Factors influencing these price movements include reductions in US shale oil production, temporary supply disruptions in Iraq and Nigeria and improved market sentiment with respect to global growth (particularly for China).
The per-barrel prices for Brent, West Texas Intermediate and Western Canada Select in US dollars have recently averaged $40, $38 and $25, respectively, two to three dollars higher than the January assumption.
The near-term outlook for oil prices is subject to both upside and downside risks.
Downside risks from elevated inventories remain, particularly in the US Midwest.
In addition, if producers are able to find further cost savings or if US oil firms take advantage of the recent firming in prices to hedge future production, the rebalancing of the market may be more protracted than expected.
There are equally important upside risks to prices.
Reduced access to financing for highly indebted US shale oil producers could result in a faster-than-anticipated decline in supply.
Some members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and non-OPEC producers are negotiating an output freeze, raising the likelihood of a broader agreement to curtail production.
Political instability in some oil exporters could also lead to supply disruptions.
Over the medium term, the risks to oil prices are tilted to the upside, but the price level required to balance the market remains highly uncertain.
The substantial reduction in US shale investment since 2014 is expected to lead to further declines in US oil production.
As supply from non-OPEC countries decreases and demand growth remains steady, the current supply overhang in the global oil market is expected to diminish.
The potential amount of a price increase is limited, however, because ongoing cost-cutting initiatives and technological advances are helping to lower production costs, in particular, for unconventional oil production, such as shale oil.
Non-energy commodity prices are modestly higher than January levels, reflecting increases across a range of subcomponents.
The expectation of additional infrastructure spending in China has alleviated some concerns over future demand for base metals, providing support for their prices.
Many metals are expected to remain in excess supply over the coming years, however, as recently completed mines continue to ramp up production globally.
In contrast, lumber prices are expected to rise through 2018 since strong housing demand in the United States - albeit less robust than anticipated in January - coincides with more modest growth in Canadian lumber supply than observed over 2015.
Overall, prices for agricultural products are expected to remain near current levels.
In light of these forces, the Bank's non-energy commodity price index is projected to stay near its recent level over the projection horizon.
Financial conditions were deteriorating at the start of 2016 on heightened market concerns about the durability of the global recovery.
However, data released since January as well as other factors have alleviated concerns about a sharp slowdown in global growth.
Most equity index prices have increased, there have been portfolio inflows in many EMEs and credit spreads have narrowed.
Actions taken by central banks have also been important in improving financial conditions.
Additional easing by the Bank of Japan and the ECB has helped to lower sovereign yields further, while the euro area has also seen a decrease in corporate yields coinciding with the expansion of its quantitative easing program to include corporate debt.
Markets have also interpreted statements by the US Federal Reserve as signalling a shift to a more moderate pace of monetary tightening, which has helped to maintain downward pressure on US Treasury yields, providing further support to asset prices.
Although volatility in financial markets has declined since January, market uncertainty over the strength of the global recovery remains.
Correlations among global asset price movements, together with diminished liquidity in some markets, may make asset prices and capital flows susceptible to sharp movements should new economic data be disappointing.
While the Bank's foreign activity measure, an indicator of demand for Canadian exports, is expected to grow strongly over the forecast horizon, it has been revised down.
This change reflects the revised outlook for US residential investment and investment in the US oil and gas sector, which are key sources of demand for Canadian exports.
The Canadian dollar has appreciated against the US dollar in response to shifting market expectations for monetary policy paths in both countries as well as increases in commodity prices.
By convention, the Canadian dollar is assumed to be close to its recent average of 76 cents over the projection horizon, compared with the 72 cents assumed in January.
Since the beginning of 2016, total CPI inflation has remained below 2 per cent, on average.
The downward pressure from declines in consumer energy prices and persistent excess capacity has been only partially offset by the temporary boost from the pass-through of the Canadian dollar's past depreciation to the prices of consumer goods.
These effects are expected to gradually diminish.
As a result, total CPI inflation is projected to remain below 2 per cent through 2016 and to be close to 2 per cent thereafter.
Core inflation is expected to be around 2 per cent throughout the projection horizon as the disinflationary effects of slack in the economy are counter balanced by the positive effects of exchange rate pass-through.
The Canadian economy continues to undergo complex adjustments to the declines in global commodity prices and in Canada's terms of trade.
Activity in areas outside the most affected industries has continued to expand, and employment and household expenditures have held up at the national level.
The reorientation toward the non-resource sectors is being supported by the ongoing expansion in the United States, the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar and accommodative monetary and financial conditions.
The complex adjustment will have important consequences for the growth of potential output for the next several years.
The Bank's estimate for potential output growth is now materially lower than previously estimated.
Real GDP is estimated to have increased by 2.8 per cent in the first quarter of 2016 but is expected to moderate in the second quarter.
This growth dynamic primarily reflects volatility in trade flows and uneven timing of household expenditures over the first half of the year.
Subsequently, growth is expected to strengthen as the drag from the resource sector wanes and the expansion of economic activity in the non-resource sector asserts itself as the dominant trend.
Real GDP is expected to grow by 1.7 per cent in 2016, 2.3 per cent in 2017 and 2.0 per cent in 2018.
Slower foreign demand growth, the higher Canadian dollar and a downward revision to business investment all have negative impacts on the outlook but are more than offset by the positive effects of the fiscal measures announced in the federal budget in March.
The net effects of the upward revision to real GDP and the downward revision to potential output growth is that, in the Bank's base-case projection, the output gap is likely to close sometime in the second half of 2017, somewhat earlier than anticipated in January.
GDP growth slowed to a very modest pace in the fourth quarter of 2015.
Investment in oil and gas related industries contracted further, while the rest of the economy continued to expand, supported by the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar and accommodative monetary and financial conditions.
As a result of the ongoing weakness in commodity prices, business investment continued to decline.
Growth was also restrained by further significant adjustments in inventory investment as firms drew down stocks from elevated levels and by a partial reversal of the surge in exports in the previous quarter.
In contrast, household expenditures grew moderately, underpinned by gains in personal disposable income and increased household borrowing.
Real GDP is estimated to have grown by 2.8 per cent in the first quarter, reflecting strength in monthly data on GDP, merchandise trade, housing and retail sales at the start of the year.
However, activity in household expenditures and exports have recently slowed, suggesting that real GDP growth should moderate to about 1.0 per cent in the second quarter.
Overall, the Bank now estimates that real GDP growth will pick up in the first half of 2016 to average roughly 2 per cent, somewhat stronger than anticipated in January.
Estimates from the Bank's two measures of economic slack (the structural and statistical approaches) indicate a widening of the output gap since the onset of the terms-of-trade shock and currently point to material excess capacity in the Canadian economy.
Similarly, the results of the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey suggest that capacity pressures remain subdued, particularly in the Prairies, where they continue to ease.
Measures of labour market health indicate continued slack: Canada's unemployment rate was 7.1 per cent in March; and the prevalence of involuntary part-time employment, long-term unemployment and the absence of wage pressures all suggest that labour is being underutilized.
Although national employment continues to increase, adjustment in the labour market is ongoing.
In the service sector, strong employment growth has supported solid growth in total labour input.
In goods-producing industries, including in the higher-paying mining, oil and gas sector, employment has been relatively weak.
Overall, the Bank judges that the amount of excess capacity in the economy remains material in the first quarter of 2016, at between 1/2 and 1 1/2 per cent.
Total inflation has evolved largely as anticipated and is expected to remain below 2.0 per cent in the coming quarters, reflecting the sharp drop in consumer energy prices.
Total CPI inflation rose to 2.0 per cent in January, because of temporary base-year effects associated with particularly low gasoline prices in January 2015, and then fell back to 1.4 per cent in February.
Looking through this monthly volatility, slack in the Canadian economy has continued to be a source of downward pressure on total inflation.
Meanwhile, exchange rate pass-through from the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar has been exerting temporary upward pressure, which the Bank estimates added 0.8 to 1.0 percentage points to total CPI inflation in the first quarter of 2016.
The importance of pass-through is illustrated by comparing inflation rates in Canada for selected goods with high import content to the rates for similar goods in the United States.
Currently, most measures of core inflation remain close to 2 per cent.
Given excess supply in the economy, these measures would be lower without the impact of exchange rate pass-through.
The outlook for the Canadian economy is significantly affected by the ongoing adjustment to the decline in commodity prices.
In the resource sector, investment is being scaled back and significant layoffs are ongoing.
However, the effects of the negative factors weighing on the resource sector will become less intense, and the drag on overall GDP growth is expected to wane over 2016.
Meanwhile, activity in the rest of the economy is expanding and is expected to be the main source of growth over the next few years.
In particular, non-commodity exports are projected to trend upward, spurring investment and employment.
The timing and magnitude of these respective adjustments in productive capacity in the two sectors will determine potential output growth and economic activity over the medium term.
Potential output growth is expected to be weaker while the Canadian economy adjusts to lower commodity prices.
Trend labour productivity and trend labour input influence the outlook for potential output.
The current weakness in trend labour productivity growth reflects the declines in investment.
As the economy restructures and investment in the non-resource sector picks up, trend labour productivity growth should accelerate.
Trend labour input growth, meanwhile, is expected to continue to decline in response to slower population growth and continued population aging.
Relative to the previous annual assessment conducted in April 2015, projections for potential output growth have been revised down, mainly reflecting slower growth in trend labour productivity as a result of weaker investment.
There is much uncertainty about the magnitude and timing of the effects of the commodity price shock on potential output.
In addition to the direct impact of weaker investment, potential output is affected by the reallocation of investment and employment.
As the non-resource sector gains strength and excess capacity is absorbed, investment, including through new firm creation, is expected.
This expanded capacity and stronger activity could further reduce long-term unemployment and underemployment in the labour market.
The procyclical effects of firm and employment creation could provide a small boost to potential output growth.
Because of the uncertainty associated with these and other factors, the Bank's estimate for potential output growth is presented as a range, with the midpoint of the range averaging about 1.5 per cent over the projection horizon.
Financial conditions for households and businesses in Canada remain highly stimulative.
While yields on 5-year Government of Canada bonds, as well as the funding costs of Canadian banks, are roughly unchanged since the beginning of the year, long-term mortgage rates have edged down to historical lows.
In this context, growth in household mortgage credit has remained robust in recent months.
Most firms surveyed in the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey continue to characterize credit as easy or relatively easy to obtain.
Indeed, following some slowing in 2015, the growth of business credit appears to have stabilized somewhat above its historical average (5.4 per cent) in recent months.
Similarly, the further tightening in business-lending conditions reported by the Bank's Senior Loan Officer Survey was concentrated in the oil and gas sector.
The prices for oil, natural gas and other commodities remain low, and firms in the oil and gas sector have announced further cuts in their capital spending plans.
Based on these announcements, the Bank estimates that the level of investment in that sector in 2016 is likely to decline sharply for a second year in a row, to about 60 per cent below its 2014 level.
The sharp decline in investment in the oil and gas sector in 2015 and 2016 is expected to restrain future production.
Growth in energy exports is therefore expected to moderate in the coming years but to remain positive as oil sands projects currently under construction are completed.
Overall growth in commodity exports is expected to remain modest over the projection horizon.
For example, lumber exporters should continue to benefit from an improving US housing market, and agricultural production and exports are projected to pick up as global food demand rises.
The reorientation of the Canadian economy toward the non-resource sector is being facilitated by the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar and accommodative financial conditions.
There are signs that the sequence of increasing foreign demand, strengthening exports and improving business confidence is progressing.
Looking through monthly volatility, non-commodity exports have recently strengthened and are expected to continue to grow at a solid pace, on average, with growth of US private domestic demand.
Moreover, the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar has improved the price competitiveness of Canadian products.
While the timing and magnitude of the benefits of the depreciation differ across industries, several categories of goods exports that are more sensitive to the exchange rate are showing positive momentum.
Examples include building and packaging materials, furniture and fixtures, paper and published products, and large motor vehicles (e.g., heavy trucks and buses).
Nevertheless, since the Bank expects that some of the recent strength of non-commodity exports relative to foreign demand is temporary, export growth is projected to be stronger in 2016 than in 2017.
While non-commodity exports are expected to increase solidly, the profile is somewhat lower relative to January's projection, given the downward revision to external demand and the higher assumed level for the Canadian dollar.
Findings from the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey support the outlook for total exports.
More than half of the firms surveyed reported that US demand is providing a boost to their sales outlook.
This includes firms already exporting to the United States, those in the process of refocusing their efforts to regain market share abroad and those developing new sales opportunities.
As non-commodity exports strengthen, the absorption of existing capacity in the sector is expected to encourage investment.
Consequently, business investment is projected to expand starting in the second half of this year as capital expenditures in the non-resource sector pick up, more than offsetting the drag from lower investment in the resource sector.
Rates of manufacturing capacity utilization for many industries in export categories that are more sensitive to the exchange rate have risen close to their historical highs.
As demand - both foreign and domestic - increases, these industries will need to invest in factories and machinery and equipment to expand production.
In addition, for many exporters, the exchange rate depreciation has boosted margins and cash flow denominated in Canadian dollars, providing funding for them to expand their investment spending.
There are increasingly tangible signs that businesses exposed to foreign markets, including those in service industries such as tourism and information technology, intend to boost investment to take advantage of solid foreign demand.
Meanwhile, although the population of firms in the mining, oil and gas industries has declined by 7.1 per cent since oil prices peaked in the middle of 2014, the number of firms in the rest of the economy has increased by 1.5 per cent.
The timing of this pickup remains uncertain as firms remain cautious: results of the spring Business Outlook Survey suggest that some firms continue to wait for signs of a sustained pickup in demand before increasing investment.
The fiscal measures included in the March 2016 federal budget amount to roughly $25 billion of additional spending over the next two years.
Specifically, the federal government will spend about $11 billion over this period on infrastructure investments and $12 billion on measures for households, including the new Canada Child Benefit.
Several other spending measures, such as environmental projects, programs to improve the socioeconomic conditions of indigenous peoples, and the construction and renovation of affordable housing, are also notable for their likely impact on GDP.
The impact of fiscal policy on economic activity depends on its multiplier effect - how much the level of output increases for every additional dollar of government stimulus.
Multipliers vary according to the type of fiscal measure, which can be broadly divided into infrastructure investment, other government spending, and tax and transfer measures.
Government infrastructure investment tends to have a larger multiplier effect than other measures, since it often generates broader spillovers to the economy beyond the direct spending effects.
The near-term impact on the economy of transfers and taxes, in contrast, may be smaller if households choose to save the additional income or use it to purchase goods and services from abroad.
The effects of the recently announced fiscal measures will begin to be felt in 2016 and will build through 2017.
Household expenditures are projected to grow at a moderate pace over the projection period, restrained by the ongoing effect of the decline in Canada's terms of trade.
While the terms of trade improved substantially in the 10-year period before oil prices began to decrease in the middle of 2014, about half of those gains have now been lost.
This represents a drop of more than $60 billion in national income.
The resulting adverse effect on wealth and income is being partially offset by strengthening employment in the non-resource sector and the recently announced federal fiscal measures (notably, the new Canada Child Benefit).
In recent data, the adjustment to the decline in commodity prices is evident in a comparison of employment, retail sales and housing activity across regions, with households in the oil-producing provinces cutting expenditures sharply.
In the housing market, new construction and activity in the resale market are strong in British Columbia and Ontario, while there are declines in housing activity in the oil-producing provinces and relative stability in Quebec and the Maritime provinces.
The strength in British Columbia and Ontario appears, in part, to reflect local demand stimulated by employment growth.
The shift in interprovincial migration in response to the oil price shock is reinforcing the regional divergence in housing market activity as workers leave the oil-producing provinces for Ontario and British Columbia.
As a result, the overall ratio of household debt to disposable income has edged higher.
On an average annual basis, real GDP is expected to grow by 1.7 per cent in 2016, 2.3 per cent in 2017 and 2.0 per cent in 2018.
This projection has been revised up slightly from January, reflecting stronger government expenditures associated with the recently announced fiscal measures that more than offset the drag associated with weaker foreign demand and a stronger dollar, a more severe contraction of business investment in the oil and gas sector, and weaker trend productivity growth.
In view of these revisions and the downward revision to the Bank's assessment of potential output growth, the Bank now projects that the output gap will close sometime in the second half of 2017, somewhat earlier than anticipated in January.
Given the uncertainty around the estimates of the output gap, the projection for the timing of the economy's return to full potential is highly imprecise.
On its own, uncertainty associated with the estimate of the output gap at the start of the projection implies considerable uncertainty about the timing of the return of economic activity to full potential.
Other factors also contribute to uncertainty regarding the trajectory of the output gap.
Total CPI inflation is expected to remain below 2 per cent through 2016 as disinflationary pressures associated with weak consumer energy prices and excess capacity in the Canadian economy more than offset the inflationary effects of exchange rate pass-through.
The Bank estimates that the upward pressure on total CPI inflation from exchange rate pass-through peaked in the fourth quarter of 2015 (adding about 0.9 to 1.1 percentage points to total inflation) and will gradually fade through 2016.
Total CPI inflation is expected to remain at 2 per cent on a sustained basis after the economy stabilizes at full capacity, although the timing is highly uncertain given the ongoing complex economic adjustments.
The forecast for total CPI inflation is revised up marginally from January, reflecting revisions to both the projection of the output gap and the impact on inflation of temporary factors.
These factors include a revised view on the evolution of gasoline margins and the recent announcement of a cap-and-trade plan for carbon emissions in Ontario.
The impact of these developments on inflation will be partly offset by a downward revision to exchange rate pass-through since the assumed level of the Canadian dollar is now higher.
Overall, inflation is expected to return sustainably to 2 per cent sometime in the second half of 2017, somewhat earlier than anticipated in January.
The March Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation was 1.6 per cent for 2016, likely reflecting weak oil prices at the time of the survey, and 2.0 per cent for 2017.
Results from the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey indicate that a large majority of firms continue to expect CPI inflation to remain within the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range over the next two years.
A fan chart, which is derived using statistical analysis of the Bank's forecast errors, provides a complementary perspective.
While the outlook for actual and potential GDP growth in the United States has been revised downward, it is possible that this reflects an overly cautious interpretation of labour force and productivity trends.
Productivity in the United States may rise more than expected if the persistent weakness in US growth contains a larger-than-estimated cyclical element.
In particular, the ongoing economic recovery could lead to an acceleration in firm creation, greater adoption of new technologies and more innovation.
Any of these developments would raise the potential growth rate of the US economy, boosting actual GDP growth.
Stronger US economic growth could have positive spillovers to Canada from increased demand for Canadian exports and improved global confidence.
Canadian exports have recently shown renewed momentum, outpacing foreign demand.
The Bank's projection for exports nevertheless remains conservative and assumes that some of the recent strength is transitory, given the uncertain timing of the impact of past exchange rate depreciation.
However, the recent strength in exports could indicate that the effect of the dollar's depreciation is more positive.
Firms may have begun to use their better pricing position to increase their share of foreign markets.
In such a scenario, the recent momentum in exports may prove more durable than assumed in the Bank's base-case projection, especially as US and global demand strengthen.
Exports could continue to outpace foreign demand for some time as firms take advantage of the new environment.
Canadian household spending has underpinned economic activity and is expected to continue to do so over the projection horizon.
In the wake of the terms-of-trade shock, consumer confidence declined significantly, primarily reflecting the deterioration of sentiment in the energy-producing regions.
As the effect of the shock on incomes builds, the weakness in confidence may diffuse more broadly.
At the same time, households have become more indebted, which may cause them to be more prudent and save more than expected, based on historical experience.
Considerable uncertainty remains about whether energy producers and related firms will be able to maintain their activity levels at current low prices.
While there are upside risks to energy prices over the medium term, the longer these low prices persist, the more likely that firms will be forced to restrict production, employment and investment spending more than currently anticipated, with associated negative consequences for energy-producing regions and the broader economy.
Growth could be slower than expected in some EMEs, particularly commodity exporters, because some of those already in recession could face renewed stresses and some additional countries could come under pressure.
Further tightening of US monetary policy could trigger large capital outflows, tighter credit conditions and debt risks in EMEs that have issued significant amounts of corporate debt denominated in US dollars.
Important structural reforms, which are necessary to expand potential output growth, could also be delayed.
In addition, China's financial system could come under stress from the anticipated buildup of financial imbalances as authorities put greater emphasis on short-term growth, which could generate broader spillovers to economic activity.
Slower growth in China or other EMEs could affect Canada through several channels, including lower commodity prices, weaker export sales, increased uncertainty and financial market volatility.
The world economy is expected to gather strength following a weak start to 2016, particularly in the United States and China.
The broad growth profile remains consistent with that of the April Monetary Policy Report, although the Bank's projections have been marked down modestly, mainly in view of the foreseeable macroeconomic effects of the UK referendum vote to exit from the European Union .
Overall, global economic growth is expected to rise from about 3 per cent this year to 3 1/2 per cent in 2017-18.
Considerable uncertainty surrounds the Brexit process, however, as well as its outcome and the broader political ramifications.
The result of the UK referendum triggered a sharp but orderly repricing of a number of asset classes in global financial markets.
Safe-haven flows contributed to exchange rate movements, notably an appreciation of the US dollar and the yen against the pound and the euro.
Yields on highly rated government bonds fell to record lows as a result of the flight to safety, as well as on expectations that central bank actions will lead to a longer period of accommodative monetary policy.
The global financial system remained resilient: markets continued to function normally, including funding markets, with movements largely stabilizing in the days following the referendum.
Market sentiment remains fragile, however, because of ongoing uncertainty about the strength of the global economy.
US economic activity in early 2016 expanded at a more modest pace than expected, largely indicating a sharper-than-anticipated contraction in business investment in the energy sector.
Equipment investment outside the energy sector also declined unexpectedly, in large part reflecting the temporary weakness in global demand.
Nonetheless, incoming data suggest that growth will rebound: job gains have averaged about 150,000 over the past three months, a pace consistent with a falling unemployment rate; initial claims for unemployment insurance have fallen below pre-crisis lows; and both the job openings rate and the growth in the number of establishments have been trending up.
US economic growth is expected to average around 2 per cent over the projection horizon, with the strong labour market and accommodative monetary policy continuing to support private domestic demand.
High levels of consumer confidence and healthy employment are expected to boost consumption growth above the growth of disposable income.
While uncertainty associated with Brexit may weigh on confidence and cloud the outlook for business prospects, investment is expected to pick up in the second half of 2016 as the drag from energy investment and the strong US dollar diminishes, domestic demand remains solid and global growth improves.
Growth in the euro area has been marked down beyond 2016 in light of the UK referendum result, which is likely to lead to weaker confidence, tighter credit conditions and reduced bilateral trade.
In Japan, authorities have announced additional fiscal stimulus, including a delay in a sales tax hike in response to ongoing weakness in private demand growth.
Both the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan have continued to implement unconventional monetary policy measures to support growth.
Economic growth in the euro area and Japan is expected to average around 1 1/2 per cent and less than 1 per cent, respectively, over the projection horizon.
Growth in both regions continues to be tempered by weak investment and structural factors, including labour market rigidities.
Economic growth in China slowed more sharply in early 2016 than expected in April, to around 4.5 per cent (quarter-over-quarter annualized).
However, strong credit growth in the early part of the year and additional fiscal stimulus are expected to support growth in the second half of 2016.
Residential investment has been stronger than expected, suggesting more underlying momentum.
Growth in China is projected to stabilize at around 6 1/2 per cent over the 2016-18 period, although rising corporate debt is exacerbating financial vulnerabilities.
Among other oil-importing emerging-market economies , conditions in the first half of the year in certain distressed economies (notably Brazil) improved by more than expected.
Growth in oil-importing EMEs is expected to pick up over 2017-18 as progress is made on structural reforms, particularly the removal of regulatory obstacles to growth.
This growth profile is now expected to be softer than in April, however, especially in light of recent increases in oil prices.
The projection for growth in the rest-of-the-world grouping has been revised down significantly since April.
In some oil-exporting EMEs, the adjustment to low oil prices has been more severe and protracted than previously anticipated, notwithstanding the recent increase in oil prices.
Growth is expected to recover as the adjustment in these economies progresses.
There is gathering evidence that the needed supply-demand adjustment in the global oil market is progressing.
In this context, the upside risks to oil prices identified in previous Reports have already partially materialized: the price assumption has risen by about US$10 per barrel relative to the April Report, although this increase was also partly a result of temporary supply disruptions.
By convention, the Bank assumes that oil prices will remain near their recent average levels: US$50, US$49 and US$36 per barrel, respectively, for Brent, West Texas Intermediate and Western Canada Select.
The substantial reductions in investment since 2014, coupled with rising demand, continue to pose an upside risk to prices over the projection horizon, although ongoing cost-cutting initiatives and technological advances limit this upside potential.
The projected stability of the non-energy commodity price index masks divergent pressures on component prices.
Lumber prices are expected to be a source of strength, benefiting from stronger housing markets in the United States and China.
In contrast, there is the potential for downward pressure on base metals prices as several new mining projects come on line globally.
The projected path of the Bank's foreign activity measure, which is an indicator of demand for Canadian exports, has been revised down to reflect a less-favourable composition of US economic activity, in particular, weaker business investment.
Growth in the foreign activity measure improves starting in the second half of 2016 as a result of the anticipated rebound in US business investment.
The Canadian economy continues to adjust to low commodity prices.
The reallocation of investment and employment from the resource sector to the non-resource sector is progressing.
Starting in the second half of 2016, real GDP is expected to increase at a rate that exceeds potential growth, driven by solid US domestic demand growth and federal infrastructure spending and other fiscal measures.
The outlook for real GDP is also supported by accommodative monetary and financial conditions and the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar.
While the fundamental elements of the growth projection are similar to those presented in April, the forecast for real GDP growth has been revised down.
Downward revisions to investment and exports more than offset the positive economic effects of the recent increase in oil prices.
The output gap is expected to close somewhat later than forecast in April, toward the end of 2017.
The Bank expects inflation to average close to 2 per cent throughout 2017 as the output gap narrows.
Economic growth has been uneven in recent quarters, fluctuating around the rate of potential output growth.
This volatility mainly reflects an uneven timing of trade flows and household expenditures.
Economic activity expanded by 2.4 per cent in the first quarter of 2016 but is estimated to have contracted by 1.0 per cent in the second quarter.
The quarterly variability is exacerbated by the economic effects of the devastating wildfires in Alberta, which are estimated to have subtracted about 1 percentage point from GDP growth in the second quarter.
A marked rebound is expected in the third quarter as oil production resumes and the rebuilding effort gets under way in the Fort McMurray area.
Also contributing to the rebound are the new Canada Child Benefit, which lends support to consumption, and a boost from government infrastructure spending.
Average growth over the second and third quarters is estimated to be about 1 1/4 per cent, softer than anticipated in the April Report.
Estimates from the Bank's two measures of economic slack (the structural and statistical approaches) point to material excess capacity.
Similarly, firms participating in the Bank's summer Business Outlook Survey reported that pressures on production capacity and the incidence of labour shortages continue to be low.
Labour market indicators suggest continuing slack.
For instance, youth participation rates are near their post-recession lows, and wage growth remains subdued, particularly in industries that produce goods.
Looking through the temporary weakness associated with the Alberta wildfires, the Bank judges that the excess capacity in the economy in the second quarter was between about 1 per cent and 2 per cent.
Total CPI inflation remains in the lower half of the Bank's inflation-control range.
Downward pressure from low consumer energy prices and persistent excess capacity are being partially offset by the temporary boost from the pass-through of the earlier exchange rate depreciation.
Most measures of core inflation remain close to 2 per cent but would be lower without the effect of exchange rate pass-through.
The near-term outlook for inflation has been revised up, reflecting firmer-than-assumed oil prices.
The expansion of activity in the non-resource sector will assert itself as the dominant trend in the second half of 2016 as the drag from declining investment in the energy sector wanes.
In addition, monetary and financial conditions remain accommodative and the yield curve has flattened, in line with recent developments in global financial markets.
Real GDP is expected to grow by 1.3 per cent in 2016, 2.2 per cent in 2017 and 2.1 per cent in 2018.
A more subdued investment profile, reflecting (in roughly equal parts) a downward revision to historical data and heightened caution in the face of uncertain demand prospects, lowers the trajectory of both real GDP and potential output.
In addition, exports have been revised down in response to relatively weaker foreign demand, exacerbated by the effects on trade of the UK referendum.
These downward revisions are partially offset by higher oil prices, which result in a modest rebound in Canada's terms of trade and a boost in real gross domestic income and consumption.
The restructuring of the resource sector in response to low commodity prices is proceeding.
Capital spending plans suggest that the contraction of investment spending in the oil and gas sector will be nearly complete by the end of the year, at which time the level of investment in that sector will be about 60 per cent below its 2014 level.
Other aspects of the restructuring, such as the shifting of employment opportunities across regions, are likely to continue for some time.
Oil prices remain below the full-cycle break-even cost for many producers.
In particular, prices remain below levels at which new investment projects in the oil sands are likely to be profitable, even with the recent increase.
Nevertheless, oil sands production should continue to increase modestly as previously committed projects are completed and come on line.
Growth in non-energy commodity exports is expected to remain subdued.
Prices for base metals remain low, and excess supply and competitiveness challenges will persist in dampening production and investment spending in the sector.
At the same time, conditions are more favourable for some other non-energy commodities: exports of building materials should continue to strengthen as the US housing market keeps on expanding, and agricultural production and exports will benefit from increasing global food demand.
An important aspect of the ongoing adjustment to lower commodity prices is the sequence of stronger non-commodity exports leading to increased investment, net firm creation and a rise in employment opportunities.
This sequence is progressing, albeit unevenly.
Looking through the monthly volatility, the Bank projects that the steady trend increase in non-commodity exports since the 2009 trough will continue.
Non-commodity exports are expected to exceed the pre-recession peak starting next year.
The profile for non-commodity exports has nevertheless been revised down, reflecting in part an unexpected but temporary slowdown in US investment earlier this year.
Non-commodity export growth is expected to be slightly stronger in 2017-18, but the level of non-commodity exports remains somewhat lower at the end of 2018.
The projected growth profile for non-commodity exports relies on historical relationships between non-commodity exports, foreign demand and the value of the Canadian dollar.
The prolonged period of disappointing global growth and weak demand for Canadian exports caused some firms to exit and a permanent loss of capacity.
As a result, the response of exports to improving demand and competitiveness may take longer to materialize should investment in new capacity be required.
In addition, the timing and magnitude of the benefits from the dollar's earlier depreciation will vary across industries and will depend on the competitive position of other countries.
Some of the more exchange-rate-sensitive categories of exports have been strengthening.
The results of the spring 2016 EDC Trade Confidence Index Survey published by Export Development Canada and the Bank's summer Business Outlook Survey provide corroborating evidence of tangible positive effects of the lower dollar for Canadian exporters.
Firms in the service industry that participated in the BOS anticipate robust sales, since many of them are benefiting from increasing foreign demand.
Improved exports are expected to lead to more business investment, net firm creation and hiring.
The latest data on the population of firms show encouraging growth of 2 per cent (year-over-year) in the first quarter of 2016, reflecting both an increase in the number of new firms and a decrease in the number of exiting firms.
As well, capacity pressures have increased in much of the manufacturing sector, and financing conditions remain favourable.
In addition, the past depreciation of the dollar has boosted margins and cash flow denominated in Canadian dollars, providing funding to expand investment spending.
These supportive business conditions have not yet translated into strong investment, likely because of uncertainty over future demand prospects and structural challenges.
Consequently, the projection for investment growth has been marked down since April, with a small negative impact on potential output.
Nevertheless, as both foreign and domestic demand increase, industries outside the resource sector will need to invest to expand production.
By the end of the year, non-resource investment is expected to dominate, resulting in an expansion of total business investment, and contribute to rebuilding capacity and increasing potential output.
Over the projection horizon, investment in machinery and equipment as a share of output should begin to recover.
Consumption is projected to grow at a moderate pace, supported by continued employment growth in the non-resource sector and federal fiscal measures (notably, the Canada Child Benefit).
A comparison of employment and retail sales across regions illustrates divergent adjustments to low oil prices, with households in the energy-producing provinces cutting expenditures sharply.
Over the projection horizon, real GDI is expected to rise with real GDP.
While household expenditures will continue to be restrained by the ongoing wealth and income effects of the past decline in Canada's terms of trade, the impact is expected to gradually diminish.
In the housing market, new construction and resale activity remain robust in British Columbia and Ontario, supported by strong demand, in part attributable to population and employment growth.
The same factors are fuelling house price increases in these regions, particularly the greater Vancouver and Toronto areas.
Sharply rising prices in these markets over the past year raise the possibility that prices are also being driven by self-reinforcing expectations, making them more sensitive to an adverse shock to housing demand.
In contrast, housing activity and house prices in the energy-producing provinces have declined; elsewhere in the country, housing growth has been modest, with most markets appearing balanced.
Over the projection horizon, the contribution of residential investment to real GDP growth is anticipated to decrease and household sector vulnerabilities to stabilize.
Real GDP growth is projected to exceed potential output growth from the second half of 2016.
The output gap is expected to close somewhat later than indicated in April, toward the end of 2017.
The timing of the closing of the gap is highly uncertain and is influenced by downward revisions to both the projection for real GDP and potential output.
The profile for potential output depends on the projection for investment spending, and both are currently subject to unusual uncertainty as a result of the economy's ongoing complex structural adjustment as well as the difficult-to-forecast effect of Brexit.
Total CPI inflation is projected to remain below 2 per cent through 2016 as disinflationary pressures associated with weak consumer energy prices and excess capacity more than offset the inflationary effects of exchange rate pass-through.
The effects of these factors will gradually dissipate, and total CPI inflation is expected to average close to 2 per cent in 2017 as the output gap narrows.
The near-term forecast for total CPI inflation is revised up from April, reflecting higher oil prices and some temporary factors.
These factors include a revised view of the evolution of gasoline prices and tax changes.
A complementary perspective is provided using statistical analysis of the Bank's forecast errors, which suggests that a 50 per cent confidence interval around the base-case projection widens from 0.3 percentage points in the third quarter of 2016 to 0.6 percentage points by the end of 2018.
Over the same period, a 90 per cent confidence band widens from 0.6 to 1.5 percentage points.
Overall, the Bank judges that the risks to the projected path for inflation are roughly balanced.
However, economic and geopolitical uncertainties have clearly risen in the wake of the Brexit vote.
While the foreseeable consequences are incorporated into the Bank's base-case projection, there may be wider ramifications that are difficult to forecast at this early stage and are therefore not included.
Many of the risks mentioned in recent Reports remain important, although two that were identified in April-stronger momentum for Canadian exports and a more pronounced adjustment of the Canadian economy to low energy prices - are now viewed as less likely to materialize.
Business investment has been unexpectedly weak across a number of advanced economies, including the United States and Canada.
But the weakness could also signal that demographic forces or some other structural factors are more relevant than previously estimated.
Such factors would suggest a dimmer outlook for non-resource business investment in Canada than presented in the base-case projection.
Household spending is expected to grow moderately over the projection horizon, but a number of circumstances could lead to less robust spending than anticipated.
Consumer sentiment remains lacklustre in the energy-producing provinces.
At the same time, because households have become more indebted, their spending may be more sensitive to adverse shocks.
Recent housing market developments, particularly in Vancouver and Toronto and adjacent areas have exacerbated vulnerabilities in the household sector, increasing the likelihood and severity of a retrenchment in consumption should a house price correction occur.
Strengthening demand, as well as supply constraints, could contribute to higher oil prices, although ongoing cost-cutting initiatives and technological advances would limit this upside potential.
Growth in demand for gasoline has been robust in many major economies, especially the United States, suggesting that demand for oil may increase faster than expected.
At the same time, persistently low investment in new oil projects since 2014 has significantly reduced prospects for supply growth.
Shale oil production in the United States has declined substantially, and conventional oil production in other non-OPEC countries, including Canada, has been decreasing.
Future production capacity may not be sufficient to meet demand, putting upward pressure on prices.
Slower growth in EMEs is a downside risk, particularly in those that hold high levels of foreign-currency-denominated debt and in commodity exporters facing fiscal and other pressures.
In China, increased emphasis by the authorities on short-term growth is contributing to a further buildup of financial imbalances.
Slower growth in EMEs could affect Canada through several channels, including lower commodity prices, weaker export sales, increased uncertainty and financial market volatility.
The downward revisions to the April Report's projection of potential GDP growth in the United States could reflect an overly conservative interpretation of labour market and productivity trends.
Productivity in the United States may rise more than expected if the persistent weakness in US growth includes a larger-than-estimated cyclical element.
In particular, the ongoing recovery could lead to an acceleration in the rate of firm creation and more technological innovation.
As well, the strong labour market and the creation of new businesses may draw more discouraged workers back into the labour force than expected.
Any of these developments would raise the potential growth rate of the US economy, boosting real GDP growth.
Stronger US economic growth could have positive spillovers to Canada from greater demand for Canadian exports and improved global confidence.
The downward revision to global growth in 2016 is mostly due to weaker-than-expected activity in the United States in the first half of the year.
Looking ahead, solid domestic fundamentals should support a rebound in growth in US real gross domestic product.
Globally, economic growth is projected to pick up from about 2 3/4 per cent in 2016 to about 3 1/2 per cent by 2018.
Emerging-market economies are expected to drive this strengthening as recessions in certain countries run their course and progress is made on reforms to support growth.
Weak business investment and trade remain dominant themes in the global economic outlook.
Global growth in investment has slowed since 2012, partly as a result of uncertainty over future prospects for global demand and ongoing structural adjustments in China.
Global financial conditions have remained broadly accommodative since the July Report, reflecting, in part, monetary policies.
In an environment of still - low inflation and lacklustre growth, central banks in advanced economies have maintained or further eased their policy stances.
Yields in most advanced economies remain near record lows, despite an increase in long-term government bond yields in recent weeks.
These low yields have been contributing to strong portfolio inflows and easier financing conditions in many EMEs.
Meanwhile, global equity prices remain near recent highs.
Corporate spreads have continued to decline since the July Report, and the issuance of global corporate debt has been strong.
Markets expect a very drawn-out normalization process for the policy interest rate in the United States.
This normalization will contribute to monetary policy divergence among advanced economies.
As it proceeds over the projection horizon, this normalization is likely to contribute to a steepening of yield curves in global markets.
The US economy is expected to strengthen in the second half of 2016, after growing more slowly than potential in the first half.
After five successive quarters of being a drag on growth, inventory investment is expected to contribute positively in the second half.
In addition, business investment should regain momentum.
Specifically, a rising oil rig count suggests an improvement in energy investment.
Residential investment also contracted in the second quarter as the composition of housing construction shifted toward smaller homes.
It is expected to resume growing, in line with demographic demand for housing.
Economic growth is expected to pick up to about 2 per cent on average over 2017-18, as forecast in the July Report.
However, the expected composition of growth has shifted.
Business investment is projected to expand at a more moderate pace than previously forecast, and the profile for residential investment is expected to be lower.
Offsetting these revisions is a slightly faster pace of consumption growth.
Business investment is now projected to grow about 3 per cent per year over 2017-18, in line with the anticipated recovery in aggregate demand.
Growth in exports should also pick up as the drag associated with the past appreciation of the US dollar continues to dissipate.
Core PCE (personal consumption expenditure) inflation has risen from its recent trough of 1.4 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2015 and is projected to reach 2 per cent by 2018, as wage pressures rise and the disinflationary effects of the past exchange rate appreciation ease.
The initial confidence effects associated with Brexit appear to have weighed less heavily on global economic activity than expected in July.
In Japan, the recently announced fiscal stimulus should provide a modest boost to growth over the remainder of this year and throughout 2017.
In addition, the Bank of Japan has introduced two major components into its monetary policy framework: "yield curve control," in which the BoJ will seek to control both short - and long-term interest rates; and an "inflation-overshooting commitment," in which the BoJ commits to expand the monetary base until consumer price inflation exceeds the 2 per cent target and remains stable above the target.
Growth in China is projected to slow gradually to 6.3 per cent by 2018.
Previously announced fiscal support and rapid credit expansion appear to be boosting growth in spending on infrastructure and in the housing sector.
While these developments are helping to replace some lost demand from slowing investment in mining and manufacturing industries, they may exacerbate financial vulnerabilities by increasing leverage, particularly in unprofitable state-owned enterprises.
In oil-importing EMEs, the associated drag on growth will wane as recessions in some countries, including Brazil, reach their troughs.
Economic growth should also be supported by progress on growth-enhancing initiatives, such as major tax reforms in India and a pledge by Indonesian authorities to ramp up spending on infrastructure projects.
The overall growth profile, however, has been marked down since July because weak global investment and the strengthening currencies of major EMEs are expected to restrain export growth.
The Bank continues to expect growth in the rest of the world to strengthen over the projection horizon as the ongoing adjustment to low oil prices in oil-exporting EMEs progresses.
Prices for Western Canada Select - one of the main pricing benchmarks for Western Canadian producers - have been slightly lower, on average, mainly because of the resolution of production outages in Alberta.
By convention, the Bank assumes that oil prices will remain near their recent average levels: about US$48, US$46 and US$32 for Brent, West Texas Intermediate and Western Canada Select, respectively.
Recent developments, including the production target proposed by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries , have influenced oil price movements, but have not materially changed the Bank's view on the pace of rebalancing in the oil market.
In response to lower oil prices over the past two years, the supply adjustment is progressing.
In this context, risks to the Bank's oil price assumption remain tilted to the upside over 2017-18: solid demand growth is expected to continue, while supply growth will be constrained by the deep cuts to capital investment over the past two years and the lag between oil investment and production.
The Bank of Canada's non-energy commodity price index is modestly lower than it was at the time of the July Report, driven mainly by weaker agricultural prices.
Looking ahead, this index should remain near its current level, with movements in prices of different commodity components offsetting each other.
A modest decline in metal prices is expected, reflecting slower growth in both investment and production in commodity-intensive industries in China, combined with strong supply growth from previously built mines in other countries.
In contrast, lumber prices should remain elevated, with support from strong growth in the US housing market.
The adjustment of the Canadian economy to low commodity prices is progressing against a backdrop of weak but improving global demand.
The drag from declining investment spending in the energy sector is waning, and there are early indications that economic activity in resource-related sectors may be bottoming out.
The broader economic impact of lower real incomes from the commodity price decline is nonetheless expected to continue to dampen domestic demand for some time as this difficult adjustment proceeds.
Meanwhile, activity outside resource sectors is growing at a solid pace, driven by an expanding service sector and supported by the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar.
Real GDP is expected to grow at a rate above that of potential output, starting in the second half of 2016.
Economic activity is supported by accommodative monetary and financial conditions and fiscal measures.
The output gap is now expected to close around mid-2018, materially later than anticipated in July.
The Bank expects inflation to be close to 2 per cent from early 2017 onward, when temporary factors will have dissipated and as economic slack is absorbed.
Growth was pulled down by a large, broad-based decline in goods exports and the impact of the Alberta wildfires, which more than offset the strength in household expenditures and government spending.
US business investment has been very soft over the past three quarters, and activity in the US manufacturing sector - an important market for Canadian exports of intermediate goods - has grown slowly.
Past declines in commodity prices, coupled with production disruptions, have also contributed to the weakness in commodity exports.
The economy is on track for a rebound in the second half of the year, reflecting improving exports, a return to full oil sands production and the rebuilding activity in Alberta.
Real GDP increased in July across a number of industries, particularly non-conventional oil production.
Goods exports posted gains in July and August, following a sharp contraction over the previous five months, but not enough to make up for previously lost ground.
Looking through volatility in the data, service exports have steadily improved, but the level of goods exports has only returned to where it was a year ago.
In addition, the rollout of the Canada Child Benefit is anticipated to start providing additional support to household spending in the second half of 2016, and the federal infrastructure spending announced in March as part of Budget 2016 should begin to have a more material impact.
However, the recently introduced federal measures to promote stability in the housing market are expected to start dampening resale activity in the near term.
Average growth over the third and fourth quarters of 2016 is expected to be about 2 1/2 per cent.
This is lower than anticipated in the July Report, reflecting a downward revision to exports, a pullback in housing activity and a shift in the timing of the implementation of federal infrastructure measures that pushes some of the impact into 2017.
Responses to the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey indicate that pressures on production capacity are little changed and remain below their long-term average.
Statistics Canada's Labour Force Survey and the Survey of Employment, Payrolls and Hours, together with interprovincial migration data, continue to provide evidence of ongoing adjustment in labour markets to the past decline in commodity prices: employment is weak in energy-intensive regions and labour continues to migrate out of Alberta.
In contrast, employment gains in the service sector, particularly in Ontario, British Columbia and Quebec, have been strong over the past year, and Ontario and British Columbia have seen provincial in-migration.
Overall, the national labour market has been resilient.
Taking a range of measures into account, the Bank's labour market indicator has edged up and shows that there continues to be more economic slack than the national unemployment rate would suggest.
The Bank judges that excess capacity in the economy in the third quarter was between 1 and 2 per cent.
Total CPI inflation remains in the lower half of the Bank's inflation-control range, with the temporary boost from the pass-through of the earlier exchange rate depreciation more than offset by downward pressures from low consumer energy prices and persistent excess capacity.
Total inflation eased from 1.3 per cent in July to 1.1 per cent in August.
This latest reading was weaker than anticipated, reflecting lower inflation for food and gasoline, as well as sector-specific shocks to telecommunications prices.
Total CPI inflation is expected to move up over the coming months as gasoline prices exert less downward pressure.
Most measures of core inflation remain close to 2 per cent but have eased somewhat since the July Report.
Without the impact of exchange rate pass-through, these measures would be somewhat lower, reflecting disinflationary pressures associated with ongoing economic slack.
The adjustment in industries most affected by commodity prices is well under way, and activity in the rest of the economy is expanding solidly.
In response to persistently lower prices, oil firms have been cutting capital expenditures and reducing labour.
The investment cuts are expected to diminish toward the end of 2016, leaving investment in the oil and gas sector about 60 per cent below its level in 2014.
The autumn Business Outlook Survey found that many businesses believe resource-related activity may be bottoming out.
Resource-related firms generally expect sales to level off at this new lower level or to increase modestly over the next 12 months.
An integral part of the economy's adjustment to the commodity price shock is the relatively solid growth in the service sector, which is supporting job creation, incomes and domestic demand.
Moreover, Business Outlook Survey responses indicate that the balance of opinion on firms' assessments of the impact of the lower Canadian dollar and weaker commodity prices on their business outlook has shifted from very negative to positive over the past five quarters.
Real GDP is projected to grow by 1.1 per cent in 2016 and about 2 per cent in 2017 and 2018.
The Bank expects solid household spending to continue to be the main contributor to growth, with additional support from government spending and exports in 2017.
The contribution from business investment is anticipated to turn positive by the start of 2017 and to subsequently increase.
Exports are expected to pick up and grow at a moderate pace over the projection horizon as foreign demand improves.
In addition, Canadian oil production and exports are expected to post gains over the projection horizon, although the declines in energy sector investment that followed the oil price shock will restrain the pace of growth over the next two years.
In the non-energy commodity sector, there could be downside risks to Canadian lumber exports, if the United States imposes countervailing duties following the expiration of the Softwood Lumber Agreement.
The average rate of growth projected for exports over 2017 and 2018 is lower than anticipated in July.
The projection for US economic activity now has slower business investment growth and a lower track for residential investment, reflecting the trend to smaller houses.
In addition, the persistent weakness in Canadian non-commodity goods exports this year suggests that competitiveness challenges will be more pronounced than previously anticipated.
The downward revision to exports, including spillovers to domestic demand and imports, lowers real GDP by 0.6 per cent by the end of 2018.
One issue that appears to be more important than previously assessed is the competitiveness of Canada against other countries in the US market.
US non-energy goods imports from Canada have stagnated, while those from competing countries have increased.
The foreign exchange value of the Canadian dollar is one relevant factor: although the Canadian dollar depreciated against the US dollar in recent years, which improved Canada's export competitiveness, competitors for US market share have also experienced currency depreciations, in some cases by more than that for the Canadian dollar.
The Mexican peso, for example, has fallen by over 30 per cent against the US dollar since mid-2014, compared with less than 20 per cent for the Canadian dollar.
The Canadian-dollar exchange rate will continue to support the level of exports, although most of the impact on the growth rate has likely already occurred.
Other factors, such as energy cost differentials, rising non-tariff trade barriers, uncertainty about the status of current and future trade agreements, and slow and complex project approval processes, may also be impeding Canada's ability to benefit from an improving global outlook.
These factors also affect firms' choice of location for production: exporting firms have been able to respond to increases in export demand through their foreign facilities located close to the source of demand rather than exclusively through Canadian exports.
In this context, persistent productivity underperformance and stronger relative wage gains in Canada have been working to gradually erode the competitiveness of Canadian exports, despite the depreciation of the Canadian dollar in recent years.
The outlook for exports remains subject to considerable uncertainty, which has significant implications for the economic projection.
For example, growth in exports that is 1 percentage point weaker than expected in both 2017 and 2018 could lower the level of real GDP by as much as 0.5 per cent by the end of the projection horizon.
In this simulation as well as in the base-case projection, the direct impact of weaker exports on GDP is mitigated by the fewer imports needed as inputs into exports.
While the weaker profile for exports in the base-case projection will translate into somewhat softer business investment, growth in investment is expected to turn positive in 2017 and to gradually pick up over the projection horizon.
The autumn Business Outlook Survey results show that more firms than in recent surveys plan to increase investment over the next 12 months.
Plans to increase investment are more widespread among service-oriented firms and often involve smaller-scale expenditures on information technology.
Intentions to increase investment remain weak among firms in the more investment-intensive manufacturing sector.
As exports increase and more firms start to face capacity constraints, investment in the non-commodity sector is still expected to rise.
National growth in household spending has held up as employment and income have continued to rise outside the energy-intensive provinces.
While the negative wealth and income effects from the past decline in Canada's terms of trade will continue to restrain household spending, accommodative monetary policy is an ongoing source of support.
Consumption should continue to grow at a healthy pace, with government transfers providing a boost in the near term and the adverse impact of the past deterioration of the terms of trade slowly dissipating.
Residential investment was strong in the first half of 2016, particularly in the housing markets in British Columbia and Ontario.
A slowdown in resale activity in British Columbia that began in May intensified in August.
An additional property transfer tax for foreign buyers in the Greater Vancouver Regional District was also introduced in August.
Nonetheless, prices in Vancouver remain elevated, and resale activity and housing starts continue to be robust in the Greater Toronto Area.
The recently announced federal measures to promote stability in the housing market are expected to lead to weaker resale activity in the near term and a modest change in the composition of residential construction toward smaller units.
In line with these changes, the contribution of residential investment to real GDP growth is expected to be lower on average than anticipated in July.
While household indebtedness has continued to increase, the new measures are expected to dampen household vulnerabilities over time, in part, by improving the average credit quality of new borrowing.
Fiscal stimulus will be an important contributor to GDP growth, with household transfers and infrastructure measures having an overall impact of 1 per cent on the level of GDP by the end of the 2017-18 fiscal year.
The disinflationary effect of low consumer energy prices and the inflationary effect of exchange rate pass-through are expected to largely dissipate by the end of 2016.
Total inflation is expected to be close to 2 per cent in 2017 and 2018.
Remaining excess capacity will continue to be a source of modest disinflationary pressure through 2017 and into 2018.
The profile for inflation is slightly lower than expected in July, since in the base-case projection the output gap is now somewhat wider and is expected to close later than previously anticipated.
The October Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation was 1.5 per cent for 2016 and 2.1 per cent for 2017.
A semi-annual question on long-term inflation expectations shows inflation averaging 2 per cent through 2025.
Results from the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey indicate that firms' expectations for inflation over the next two years remain within the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range.
More information is provided on developments related to risks - both what has happened since the previous Report and what is being monitored in the near term.
This information highlights the indicators being monitored but is not necessarily comprehensive.
It will help clarify the Bank's assessment of when a risk may be receding and will likely be dropped in a future Report; when a risk may become less important because aspects of it may be materializing, leading to a revision to the economic projection; or when the nature of a risk may be changing, for example, from being one - to two-sided.
The evolution of the risks since the previous Report is summarized in Table 4.
The outlook for inflation is subject to several upside and downside risks emanating from both the external environment and the domestic economy.
As in past reports, the focus is on a selection of risks identified as the most important for the projected path for inflation, drawing from a larger set of risks taken into account in the projection.
The Bank's projection for US potential GDP growth could reflect an overly conservative interpretation of labour market and productivity trends.
In addition, global uncertainty has increased recently, exacerbated by heightened political uncertainty and rising protectionist sentiment.
Either favourable dissipation of this uncertainty or stronger growth in the structural drivers of the US economy could result in improved US business confidence and investment, with positive spillovers for Canadian exports.
Strengthening demand, as well as supply constraints, could contribute to higher oil prices.
Higher-than-expected oil prices would improve Canada's terms of trade and provide a boost to wealth and household spending in Canada.
Over time, weaker business investment would also reduce capital deepening and lower potential output, partially mitigating the disinflationary effect of weaker demand.
Growth could be slower in some EMEs, particularly commodity exporters and those with elevated US-dollar-denominated debt.
There are risks around China's rebalancing, particularly given a further buildup of financial imbalances.
Given the high level of household indebtedness, households may also become more prudent, restraining consumption and housing expenditures.
The global economy improved in the second half of 2016, and economic growth is forecast to continue to strengthen over the projection horizon.
In particular, growth in real gross domestic product in the United States picked up after a weak first half of the year and is expected to remain solid.
Meanwhile, contractionary pressures appear to have reached a trough in some emerging-market economies.
Overall, global economic growth is projected to increase from just under 3 per cent in 2016 to about 3 1/2 per cent by 2018.
These potential policy changes pose important risks to the current projection, which will be updated in future reports as additional details become available.
Yields on long-term government bonds in the United States have risen to levels prevailing in mid-2015.
This increase mainly reflects market expectations of a shift in the policy mix under the incoming US administration, with an anticipated fiscal expansion bringing higher growth, inflation and policy interest rates.
Long-term yields have also risen in many other advanced and emerging economies, albeit to a lesser degree.
Ongoing monetary policy stimulus has limited the rise in yields in the euro area and Japan.
In this context, the US dollar has continued to appreciate against most other advanced and emerging-market currencies, reaching its highest level in nearly 15 years on a nominal trade-weighted basis.
This exchange rate adjustment should help to redistribute global demand.
At the same time, positive market sentiment about the US economy has led to increased portfolio outflows from several EMEs since the October Report, contributing to a tightening in financial conditions in some of these economies.
Expectations of stronger US growth have also supported a rally in stock markets in advanced economies.
The presumption that the incoming US administration will cut corporate taxes and roll back regulations has likely contributed to strong gains in US equities with domestic exposures.
Growth is expected to rebound in the second half of 2016 after a weaker first half, in part reflecting the positive contribution of inventory investment.
The growth profile for 2017 and 2018 has been revised upward, by about 0.1 and 0.3 percentage points, respectively, taking into account initial assumptions about the anticipated shift in fiscal policy.
While the nature and timing of fiscal policy changes in the United States are unknown, the base-case projection for the US economy embeds an element of fiscal expansion, which boosts the level of GDP by about 0.5 per cent by the end of 2018.
Considerable uncertainty remains regarding the scale of any future cuts in tax rates and the extent to which they may be accompanied by offsetting measures that will affect the tax base and by changes in various categories of spending.
Accordingly, this base case should be viewed as a reasonable starting point that will be updated as the incoming administration's plans take shape.
Consumption growth is projected to remain healthy, supported by robust fundamentals, including a strong labour market with gradually rising wages.
Energy investment is anticipated to support the recovery in capital expenditures, with higher oil prices encouraging a gradual rise in drilling activity.
Residential investment is projected to grow at a healthy pace as household incomes rise and construction activity picks up to meet demographic demand.
At the same time, the more robust profile for domestic demand is partly offset by a larger drag from net exports associated with a stronger US dollar.
Core personal consumption expenditure inflation is expected to gradually increase.
At the same time, wage pressures are rising in an economy that is running close to full employment.
The recent strength in the US dollar should, however, dampen inflationary pressures.
In Japan, third-quarter growth surprised on the upside, and revisions to its national accounts indicate greater momentum than previously assessed.
In addition, stronger external demand coming from the United States and a weaker yen should boost output.
As a result, Japan's GDP is projected to grow by an average of around 1 per cent over 2016-18, slightly higher than anticipated in the October Report.
In the euro area, economic activity and employment growth have held up despite financial system stresses in some countries and elevated political uncertainty, particularly around the consequences of Brexit.
Growth over the projection horizon should continue to be modest, tempered by structural factors, including labour market rigidities.
GDP growth is projected to soften gradually, from 6.6 per cent in 2016 to 6.4 per cent in 2018.
Growth of business investment is expected to slow as reforms to state-owned enterprises continue, particularly steps to address overcapacity in some segments of the mining and manufacturing sectors.
Residential investment should also be dampened by measures recently introduced by local governments to curb rapid growth in housing sales and prices.
In other oil-importing EMEs, growth in both 2016 and 2017 is expected to be slightly lower relative to the October Report.
Domestic factors, such as challenges in implementing structural reforms, as well as capital outflows and tighter financial conditions will restrain economic activity in some countries.
This effect will be somewhat offset, however, by weaker currencies, which should boost net exports.
Overall, GDP growth is projected to strengthen gradually, from 3.3 per cent in 2016 to 4.4 per cent in 2018.
This pickup is expected to be driven primarily by Latin America, supported, in part, by the bottoming-out of the recession in Brazil.
Growth in the rest of the world is expected to accelerate from 1 per cent in 2016 to 3 per cent in 2018.
This pickup is mainly due to the anticipated recovery in oil-exporting EMEs, such as Russia and Saudi Arabia, as oil prices stabilize and the adjustment to past oil price declines runs its course.
Global crude oil benchmark prices have recently averaged about 15 per cent higher than assumed in the October Report.
Part of this increase reflects the agreement between the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and other oil producers to cut output to hasten the rebalancing in the oil market.
The Bank still expects a significant drawdown in oil inventories in the second half of 2017, as demand growth is projected to outpace growth in production.
The per-barrel prices for Brent, West Texas Intermediate and Western Canada Select in US dollars have recently averaged about $55, $50 and $35, respectively, roughly $3 to $7 higher than the October assumption Risks to the Bank's oil price assumption remain tilted to the upside over 2017-18, since prices are still below levels likely required to support medium-term market rebalancing.
The scope for sustained higher prices is limited, however, because technological advances have contributed to lower production costs for unconventional oil production, notably shale oil in the United States.
There has been significant divergence in the evolution of non-energy commodity prices.
Base metal prices have surged, particularly for iron and copper, driven in part by expectations of infrastructure spending in the United States.
In contrast, gold prices have fallen, partly in anticipation of tighter US monetary policy.
The adjustment of the Canadian economy to past declines in commodity prices is progressing.
Activity in resource-related industries appears to have troughed.
At the same time, investment and employment are being reallocated to other sectors of the economy that are expanding, most notably the service sector.
The broader effects of the past deterioration of the terms of trade on real incomes and wealth will likely be an ongoing constraint on the growth of economic activity through 2017.
Real GDP is expected to grow at a rate moderately above that of potential output throughout the projection horizon.
Growth in the service sector in particular will underpin rising employment, household incomes and consumption.
A modest expansion of exports and investment will be supported by strengthening foreign demand, although persistent competitiveness challenges are expected to restrain growth in production of non-energy goods.
Export growth will be limited by the recent appreciation of the Canadian dollar, alongside that of the US dollar, vis--vis most other currencies.
Monetary and financial conditions, the strengthening US and global economies and federal fiscal stimulus are expected to support economic activity, despite a modest increase in longer-term borrowing costs since October.
Residential investment will be tempered by recent increases in mortgage rates and measures implemented by the federal government in October to mitigate risks to financial stability.
While the full range of possible policy changes in the United States has not been incorporated, the outlook does include an initial benchmark assumption about fiscal stimulus that boosts demand for Canadian exports and supports business confidence in Canada.
This positive effect is, however, tempered by a deterioration in Canadian competitiveness related to assumed corporate tax cuts in the United States.
While prospective protectionist trade measures in the United States would have material consequences for Canadian investment and exports, these measures have not been included in the base case.
Total consumer price index inflation is projected to be near 2 per cent through 2017 and 2018 as the offsetting effects of higher consumer energy prices and lower food prices dissipate and economic slack is absorbed.
Over the near term, however, total CPI is expected to remain lower than was anticipated in October, mainly reflecting weaker-than-expected food prices.
Following a very weak second quarter, largely due to the Alberta wildfires and a sharp decline in non-energy exports, economic growth rebounded strongly.
Growth was temporarily boosted by the resumption of production in the oil sands and a partial rebound in non-energy exports.
Consumption, especially of services, remained robust, benefiting from the rollout of the Canada Child Benefit.
In contrast, residential investment fell in the third quarter for the first time since the beginning of 2014.
Government expenditures contracted modestly as public capital formation was less than expected in the third quarter.
Business investment remained weak, despite a significant temporary jump associated with the arrival of an imported production module destined for the Hebron offshore oil project.
As the temporary factors that spurred activity in the third quarter of 2016 dissipate, growth will moderate to average about 2 per cent over the fourth quarter of 2016 and the first quarter of 2017, underpinned by solid household consumption and fiscal infrastructure spending.
Residential investment, however, is expected to contract further as resale activity is dampened by higher mortgage rates and the recent changes to federal housing finance policies.
On balance, growth in business investment and exports of non-energy goods will remain modest.
Estimates from the Bank's two measures of economic slack continue to point to material excess capacity.
Similarly, the latest results from the winter Business Outlook Survey indicate that capacity pressures are roughly unchanged from the previous survey.
Total hours worked have not risen and, in contrast to the United States, wage pressures continue to be subdued.
Overall, the Bank's labour market indicator suggests an increase in slack over the past year.
In the context of the ongoing adjustment of the economy, employment outside the energy-intensive provinces (mainly in Ontario, British Columbia and Quebec) has registered solid gains, primarily in service industries.
While employment in the energy-intensive provinces has declined over the past year, there are some tentative signs that it is stabilizing.
Interprovincial migration has helped the reallocation of resources in the economy.
Migration to Alberta has reversed from a net inflow of more than 10,000 persons in the second quarter of 2014 to a net outflow of close to 4,000 persons in the third quarter of 2016.
Corresponding flows into Ontario, in particular, have risen sharply.
The Bank judges that excess capacity in the economy in the fourth quarter was between 3/4 and 1 3/4 per cent.
Total CPI inflation for November, at 1.2 per cent, remained in the bottom half of the Bank's inflation-control range of 1 to 3 per cent.
Goods inflation is subdued, largely reflecting low food and consumer energy inflation.
Total CPI inflation was somewhat weaker than anticipated because retail food prices declined by about 2 per cent on a year-over-year basis in recent months, their lowest rate since 1992.
The weakness in food inflation reflects the past declines in agricultural commodity prices, the waning of exchange rate pass-through and intensified competition in the retail food sector.
The Bank now uses three new measures of core inflation to obtain a more reliable gauge of the underlying trend of inflation.
These measures have declined since mid-2016 to below 2 per cent, partly reflecting the diminishing effects of exchange rate pass-through.
They are broadly consistent with the Bank's assessment of the degree of excess capacity in the Canadian economy.
Total CPI inflation is expected to rise from 1.4 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2016 to 1.8 per cent in the first quarter of 2017, as gasoline prices increase on a year-over-year basis.
Consumer energy price inflation will rise temporarily in 2017 to reflect higher prices for energy commodities and the impact of the new regulations related to the cap-and-trade plan in Ontario and the carbon levy in Alberta.
Overall economic growth is being supported by the expanding service sector while the drag from the commodity price decline on the resource sector dissipates.
In particular, activity in resource-related industries is showing signs of bottoming out.
The goods sector has started to grow on a year-over-year basis, after two years of near-steady declines.
The winter Business Outlook Survey provides further evidence of a bottoming-out of resource-related activity, with businesses tied to oil now expecting some sales growth following a period of decline.
As well, the Bank's more detailed consultations with firms in the energy sector find cautious optimism and modest increases in capital expenditures.
Since late 2014, the service sector has been growing at an average annualized rate of near 2 per cent, which can account for all the growth in real GDP.
Moreover, exports of services, driven by foreign sales of commercial services and travel services, have outperformed goods exports.
Results of the winter Business Outlook Survey suggest that the service sector will continue to experience solid growth.
The Bank estimates real GDP growth of 1.3 per cent in 2016 before picking up to around 2 per cent in 2017 and 2018.
As in October, household expenditures are projected to be the main contributor to overall growth in 2017, together with sizable additional support from government spending and from exports.
The annual contribution from business investment is anticipated to turn positive in 2018.
Canadian oil production and exports are expected to expand over the projection horizon, although the declines in energy sector investment in recent years will restrain their growth.
Increases in non-energy commodity exports are also expected to be modest, given persistent competitiveness challenges that will dampen production and investment in the sector.
The recent appreciation of the Canadian dollar against the currencies of some key competitors is projected to weigh on Canadian export growth.
In recent years, non-commodity exports have not been as strong as expected.
Consequently, the Bank updated its framework to better account for the evolving nature of foreign demand and structural factors, including competitiveness challenges.
Taking into account both the new assessment of foreign demand, which is expected to grow modestly in the coming years, and the improved measures of structural and other competitiveness challenges, total exports are expected to increase by about 3 per cent on average over the projection horizon.
The base-case projection assumes that foreign demand will be boosted by US fiscal stimulus.
The positive impact is, however, dampened by the decline in Canadian competiveness associated with assumed corporate tax cuts in the United States.
Consequently, the projected export profile incorporates a modest downward adjustment to reflect this possibility; this initial assumption will be revised once concrete policy measures are announced and enacted.
The base case does not include any protectionist measures that may be adopted by the incoming US administration.
Investment in the service sector has underpinned total business investment in recent years.
While service sector investment was slow to recover from the financial crisis, surpassing its 2007 level only in 2015, it has been more resilient than investment in goods-producing industries.
Looking ahead, service sector investment should continue to increase.
In particular, the winter Business Outlook Survey indicates that intentions to invest in machinery and equipment remain widespread among service sector firms.
The recent rebound in the number of new drilling rigs and an analysis of the capital expenditure plans of oil and gas firms point to a modest increase in the level of investment in the energy sector beginning in early 2017.
Furthermore, the ongoing shift in the economy toward the production of services could result not only in a different composition of investment but also in a lower share of investment in GDP.
In addition, the current high level of uncertainty could be having a greater restraining effect on business investment than previously assessed.
While firms surveyed by the Bank continue to cite insufficient domestic demand as the main reason for holding back investment, some also cite uncertainty as an obstacle.
As well, a number of exporters have indicated that a challenging competitive environment has encouraged them to maintain or build a foreign presence to help meet foreign demand.
Future US policies could also incite firms to invest in the United States rather than in Canada.
Since the US fiscal stimulus currently being assumed would include a reduction in personal and corporate tax rates, the competitiveness of Canadian firms could be adversely affected.
Consequently, to reflect this possibility, the projected Canadian investment profile incorporates a downward adjustment.
The Bank anticipates continued solid consumption, supported by accommodative monetary policy and higher federal government transfers, despite weakness in the energy-intensive provinces associated with the impact of the past decline in the terms of trade.
As a result, the share of residential investment in the Canadian economy should gradually ease toward a level closer to historical experience.
Mortgage interest rates have increased since October, mainly reflecting higher funding costs.
As in October, the Bank estimates that the impact of the federal government's tighter housing-related measures will subtract 0.3 per cent from the level of real GDP by the end of 2018.
Over the 2017-18 projection horizon, total CPI inflation is expected to be close to 2 per cent.
The inflationary effect of exchange rate pass-through is expected to have largely dissipated by early 2017.
There will be upward pressures on consumer energy prices during 2017, stemming from the impact of higher commodity prices and the new regulations related to carbon use.
This upward pressure is more than offset by the disinflationary effect of food prices and excess capacity through most of the year.
By around mid-2018, inflation is expected to be sustainably at the target as excess capacity in the economy dissipates.
The January 2017 Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation was 1.5 per cent in 2016 and 2.0 per cent in both 2017 and 2018.
Similarly, results from the winter Business Outlook Survey indicate that firms' expectations for inflation over the next two years remain within the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range.
Overall, the Bank assesses that the risks to the projected path for inflation are roughly balanced, given what is known today.
However, the outlook is subject to considerable economic and geopolitical uncertainty, including that surrounding the policies of the incoming administration in the United States.
Most of the risks remain relevant.
The risk of a broad-based slowdown in EMEs is now captured under two new risks: a notable shift toward protectionist global trade policies and higher global long-term interest rates.
The risk of higher oil prices has been expanded to include a broader set of commodities.
While the base case incorporates some strengthening of US economic growth, resulting in part from anticipated fiscal stimulus, a distinctly stronger growth path is also possible.
The ongoing recovery, together with actual and anticipated policy changes, could trigger "animal spirits" -
that is, boost business confidence and lead to an acceleration in the rate of investment, firm creation and innovation.
Productivity in the United States may rise by more than expected if the persistent weakness in growth includes a larger-than-estimated cyclical element, and more discouraged workers may be drawn back into the workforce.
Additional infrastructure spending, deregulation and tax cuts could further strengthen demand and potential output in the long run.
Stronger US household spending and public and private investment would have positive spillovers for Canadian exports.
While the precise trade policy measures to be taken by the incoming US administration remain to be determined, the protectionist tilt is already evident.
More-negative effects are possible if US measures are material, especially if they prompt protectionist responses from other economies.
Beyond the direct effects on Canadian exports and business investment, such policies could weigh on the global economy by dampening global trade and economic growth.
In a more adverse scenario, the process of globalization - and notably the development of global value chains, which has underpinned world growth in recent decades - could go into reverse.
In such a scenario, additional pervasive negative effects on productivity and potential growth are possible, in Canada and globally.
Risks to commodity prices remain tilted to the upside.
If realized, these risks would improve Canada's terms of trade, wealth and household spending.
Prices of base metals, particularly iron and copper, could rise further if infrastructure spending in the United States is greater than markets anticipate.
There is also some upside risk to oil prices, notwithstanding the price gains seen late in 2016.
Oil-related capital expenditures have sunk globally over the past two years, raising the risk that future oil supply could be inadequate to meet demand.
The degree of upside risk to prices will depend on a number of uncertain factors, notably ongoing efficiency gains in production at unconventional sources.
The disappointing performance of business investment to date could reflect more-sustained structural factors.
Moreover, while recent federal policy changes related to housing finance are meant to mitigate the vulnerability associated with highly indebted households over time, their adverse near-term impact on residential investment could be larger than anticipated.
Outsized negative effects could occur if the policies were to have a pronounced effect on house prices in major centres.
The recent rise in global bond yields reflects increased optimism for growth, inflation and policy rates, partly driven by the expected fiscal expansion in the United States.
Yet term premiums remain compressed by historical standards.
While the base case assumes term premiums return gradually to normal, there is a possibility of a sharp increase.
If this were to occur, the upward pressure on bond yields could increase capital outflows from EMEs, and financial conditions could tighten further.
These developments could translate into a decline in activity in sectors sensitive to interest rates, a rise in debt-service burdens, and weaker global and Canadian growth.
Recent data point to a somewhat stronger pickup in global economic growth than had been expected at the time of the January Monetary Policy Report.
However, the considerable uncertainty noted in January, particularly regarding US economic policy, continues to cloud the outlook.
This uncertainty is expected to persist as the possible changes under consideration, notably in relation to fiscal and trade policies, would involve complex and probably lengthy negotiations and changes to legislation.
With inflation strengthening and the labour market nearing full employment, the US Federal Reserve increased the federal funds rate by 25 basis points in mid-March.
Even with this step toward normalization, US monetary policy remains accommodative.
Financial conditions globally continue to support growth.
Global economic growth is projected to increase from around 3 1/4 per cent in 2017 to about 3 1/2 per cent over 2018-19, broadly unchanged since January.
This projection incorporates a slower track for global potential growth than previously assumed.
The uncertainty around US trade policy is also now expected to dampen the pickup in trade and investment growth globally.
Yields on long-term sovereign bonds are broadly unchanged since the January Report and remain low by historical standards, reflecting in part ongoing quantitative easing in some advanced economies.
Equity prices are higher and credit spreads are narrower than in January, partly in response to improved expectations for global growth.
Measures of market volatility across most asset classes have been relatively low, in contrast to continuing high levels of uncertainty in relation to US trade policy and perceptions of significant political risk, for example, in Europe.
In foreign exchange markets, the Canadian dollar is little changed against the US dollar but has depreciated against the currencies of other important trade partners, such as Mexico.
The US economy is anticipated to grow at around 2 per cent over the projection horizon, amid unusually high levels of policy uncertainty.
Temporary factors, including a weather-related decline in the consumption of utilities, likely explain most of the weakness in first-quarter growth.
The fiscal stimulus incorporated into the projection is now assumed to begin somewhat later than in the January projection, reflecting possible legislative challenges.
Potential output growth has also been adjusted lower.
Strong domestic fundamentals should continue to underpin a moderate pace of growth.
Consumption growth is expected to remain solid, supported by anticipated tax cuts and a strong labour market.
Residential investment, meanwhile, is projected to grow at a robust pace, given rising household income and demographic demand.
Although business investment was a source of drag in 2016, growth was positive in the latter part of the year and should continue to recover, given the rebound in energy investment and the strong prospects for domestic demand.
Net exports, in contrast, are expected to remain a drag on growth, given the past appreciation of the US dollar and a boost in imports from firm domestic demand.
While the timing and nature of US fiscal policy changes remain unknown, the base-case projection embeds fiscal stimulus that is assumed to boost the level of gross domestic product by 0.5 per cent by mid-2019.
The cumulative amount of stimulus is the same as that built into the January Report, but it has been delayed in the projection given indications that it will take longer than previously anticipated to implement corporate and personal tax cuts.
Starting in 2019, expenditure cuts are now expected to modestly dampen the amount of fiscal stimulus.
These assumptions will continue to be updated as the budgetary process unfolds.
With the labour market close to full employment and core inflation increasing, markets expect several further increases in the federal funds rate in 2017 and beyond.
This contrasts with other major economies such as the euro area and Japan, where economic recoveries are not as advanced and monetary policy is expected to remain accommodative for longer.
Increased lending to households and a rebound in residential investment supported growth in the latter part of 2016, and recent indicators suggest a faster-than-anticipated pace of expansion in 2017.
Highly accommodative monetary conditions and an improving labour market have underpinned this progress and should continue to sustain domestic demand.
The pace of expansion should nevertheless remain modest, at around 1 1/2 per cent, over the projection horizon, tempered by slow potential output growth and political uncertainty.
In Japan, domestic demand has been more sluggish than expected in January and should continue to be restrained by tepid wage growth.
Economic growth has therefore become more reliant on exports, which have been supported by a weaker yen and robust demand from emerging Asia.
Overall, growth is projected to remain at around 1 per cent over 2017-19, in line with expectations in the January Report.
China's economic rebalancing toward more consumption-based growth is occurring in an environment of elevated financial vulnerabilities.
In managing the transition, Chinese authorities have been seeking to maintain growth while taking steps to address these vulnerabilities through, for example, restrictions on new housing purchases and selective tightening of lending rates.
Capital outflows seem to have moderated, partly reflecting last year's tightening of capital controls.
Overall, growth in China is expected to ease gradually over the projection horizon, from 6.5 per cent in 2017 to 6.3 per cent in 2018-19.
Incoming data show that the pace of economic activity has also improved in other oil-importing emerging-market economies , particularly in Asia.
This is in contrast to Brazil, where the economic contraction has been deeper than expected but should ease over the projection, helped in part by past increases in commodity prices.
Overall, the pace of GDP growth in oil-importing EMEs is expected to continue to strengthen, from 3.7 per cent in 2017 to 4.2 per cent in 2019, supported by a return to positive growth in some distressed economies.
This pickup is more modest than expected in the January Report, however, reflecting a downward revision to potential growth primarily because of delays in implementing growth-enhancing structural reforms.
Potential growth has also been revised down in oil-exporting countries, including Saudi Arabia and Russia, reflecting weaker investment following past oil price declines.
As a result, the anticipated rebound in economic growth in the "rest of the world" grouping is now expected to be weaker than indicated in January, rising from about 2 per cent in 2017 to around 2 3/4 per cent by 2019, as the drag from past oil price declines dissipates.
Oil prices have been relatively stable since January, reflecting a number of offsetting factors.
Demand has been stronger than expected, and there has been a reportedly high degree of compliance with cuts agreed to in December by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and some other oil producers.
Market concerns about oversupply have been reinforced, however, by unexpected increases in US crude oil inventories and the rising rig count in shale oil fields in the United States.
On the upside, the substantial reductions in investment since 2014, coupled with rising demand, may mean there is insufficient capacity to satisfy demand over the medium term.
This potential upside risk is attenuated by technological advances that have continued to bring down the costs of unconventional oil production.
There are also important short-term downside risks.
In particular, the break-even costs of US shale oil suppliers may be lower than expected, and the production agreement between OPEC and some non-OPEC oil producers may not be renewed.
Some non-energy commodity prices have increased modestly since January.
Lumber prices have risen in light of the Canada-US softwood lumber dispute, reflecting a slowdown in lumber shipments since new duties could be applied retroactively, as well as ongoing robust housing demand in the United States.
Base metal prices are somewhat higher, driven by global supply disruptions and past production cuts.
Looking ahead, the Bank of Canada's non-energy commodity price index should remain near its current level, with further upward pressure on certain components such as base metals largely offset by small declines in other categories.
Economic growth in Canada in recent quarters has been stronger than expected in the January Report, but the composition of aggregate demand has been uneven.
In the oil and gas sector, a resumption of growth in investment spending is under way in the wake of significant adjustments to past declines in commodity prices.
This contributed, together with very strong consumption and residential investment, to a temporary surge in growth in the first quarter.
In contrast, non-commodity business investment and exports remain weak, raising questions about the medium-term sustainability of the upturn.
Over the forecast horizon, the Bank expects the economy to continue to grow, but at a more moderate pace.
Economic activity will be supported by rising foreign demand, federal fiscal stimulus and accommodative monetary and financial conditions.
In addition, the composition of demand growth is expected to broaden: the pace of household expenditures, especially residential investment, moderates as the contributions from exports and business investment increase, albeit at a much slower pace than would normally be expected at this stage of the cycle.
Ongoing competitiveness challenges and uncertainty surrounding the prospects for global trade are expected to limit this broadening of growth.
Largely reflecting temporary strength at the start of the year, real GDP is anticipated to expand by 2.6 per cent in 2017, before slowing to 1.9 per cent in 2018 and 1.8 per cent in 2019.
The output gap is now expected to close in the first half of 2018, somewhat sooner than projected in January.
Relative price movements, especially higher consumer energy prices, helped boost inflation in the first quarter of 2017, but their effect is expected to be temporary.
In contrast, the Bank's preferred measures of core inflation have drifted down in recent quarters and remain below 2 per cent, consistent with material excess capacity in the Canadian economy.
As in January, the Bank expects CPI inflation to remain close to 2 per cent over the projection horizon as the effects of the relative price movements dissipate and excess supply is absorbed.
Growth in Canadian GDP in the fourth quarter of 2016 surpassed expectations in January.
Robust household spending, increased government expenditures and, to a lesser extent, modest exports supported growth.
The positive surprise was concentrated in residential investment, a smaller-than-anticipated inventory drawdown and a larger pullback in imports.
In contrast, final domestic demand, a key ingredient for a sustained improvement in economic activity, was weaker than projected.
The estimate for economic activity in the first quarter of 2017 has been revised up, to 3.8 per cent from the 2.5 per cent expected in the January Report.
GDP growth in the quarter increased partly because of a resumption of investment growth in the oil and gas sector after a long period of steep declines.
Market intelligence suggests that this pace of growth is unlikely to continue in the current price environment.
Consumption growth was also very strong, partially as a result of a temporary boost from the Canada Child Benefit.
As well, motor vehicle sales reached an all-time high, a pace that is well above expected annual demand.
Similarly, housing activity rose sharply to a pace that is unlikely to be sustained given the economic fundamentals.
Given all of these factors as well as weak non-commodity investment and exports, the Bank expects real GDP growth to moderate to 2.5 per cent in the second quarter.
While the degree of excess capacity has declined since the January Report, the Bank judges that in the first quarter of 2017 it remains material, between 1 1/4 and 1/4 per cent.
To help manage the considerable uncertainty surrounding the estimation of the output gap, the Bank places equal weight on the estimates from its two approaches (one is statistical or mechanical and the other is structural), recognizing that each approach has certain strengths and weaknesses.
Consequently, the two approaches can suggest different assessments of the degree of slack in the economy.
For example, in the face of persistently weak economic activity, the statistical method tends to attribute more of the weakness to lower potential output than does the structural method.
The labour market provides another perspective from which to assess the degree of excess capacity.
Employment growth has remained firm at the national level.
However, weak growth in both hours worked and wages, together with no improvement in the Bank's labour market indicator over the past year, suggests that the workforce remains underutilized.
In contrast, the labour market in the United States is now close to full employment and wages are increasing at a solid pace.
With growth in unit labour costs subdued and
the Bank's measures of core inflation below 2 per cent, it is possible that the degree of excess supply in the economy could be larger than the midpoint would suggest.
After reaching a low of 1.2 per cent in November 2016, CPI inflation rose to 2.0 per cent in February, largely because of higher consumer energy prices.
For the first quarter of 2017, the anticipated rise in CPI inflation is now somewhat larger than expected at the time of the January Report.
This surprise reflects stronger increases in prices for passenger vehicles and some services (notably hotels and intercity transportation), which were partly offset by weaker retail food prices.
The impact of all these relative price movements on inflation is expected to be temporary.
All the Bank's measures of core inflation have drifted down in recent quarters.
Consistent with persistent economic slack, these measures all remain below 2 per cent, although the range remains relatively wide - between 1.3 and 1.9 per cent.
Potential output growth is projected to increase gradually from a trough of 1.3 per cent in 2016-17 to 1.6 per cent by 2020.
Trend labour productivity growth should improve as the lagged effects of previously weak investment dissipate, particularly in the oil and gas sector.
In addition, as excess capacity in the non-resource sector is absorbed, investment there is expected to support higher trend labour productivity growth.
In contrast, population aging and other demographic forces are expected to continue to weigh on trend labour input growth.
Relative to the previous annual assessment in April 2016, the Bank's estimates for potential output growth over the projection have been revised down.
The revision is explained by slower-than-anticipated growth in trend labour productivity resulting from the pronounced weakness in business investment over 2015 and 2016.
This slower growth is only partially offset by a modest upward revision to trend labour input growth, reflecting higher levels of immigration.
The Bank's estimate of potential output is subject to considerable uncertainty and as such the estimates are presented as a range.
In particular, the procyclical rebound in potential output growth incorporated into the base-case projection could be stronger than expected.
Real GDP growth is projected to continue to slow beyond the first half of 2017 and become more balanced across demand categories, with larger contributions from exports as well as public and private investment and smaller contributions from residential investment and consumption.
From a sectoral perspective, economic growth continues to be supported by the expanding service sector.
Growth in resource-related activity is resuming in the wake of significant adjustments to past declines in commodity prices, helping to support a modest expansion of the goods sector.
The forecast for real GDP growth in 2017 has been revised up following stronger-than-anticipated household expenditures, particularly residential investment, as well as stronger-than-expected spending activity in the oil and gas sector.
The surprise in growth is concentrated in the first quarter.
Ongoing challenges to competitiveness and uncertainty about US trade policy, however, are projected to weigh on the export outlook.
As a result, export growth is particularly muted relative to past cycles, leading to only a modest increase in the share of exports in GDP.
Non-commodity exports are expected to expand moderately, led by services and several manufactured goods.
Exports of manufactured goods, including aircraft and related parts, and pharmaceutical and medicinal products, are forecast to increase.
In contrast, the outlook also incorporates the impact of announced changes to auto production mandates, which are expected to restrain exports in the second half of the year.
Commodity exports will be supported by firmer commodity prices.
Nevertheless, past declines in investment in the oil and gas sector and competitiveness challenges in the mining sector will limit their contribution to overall export growth.
Similarly, lumber exports are being adversely affected by uncertainty about the size of countervailing and anti-dumping import duties levied by the United States and the possibility that these duties will be applied retroactively.
Export growth has been revised down relative to the January Report mainly because of additional modest drag on global investment coming from uncertainty about US trade policy.
As with exports, business investment spending is expected to increase over the projection horizon, reflecting, in part, an end to the adjustment to the commodity price shock and a modest expansion in the non-resource sector.
Nevertheless, it is projected to remain well below what would normally be expected based on previous business cycles.
Overall, business investment's share of total demand in the Canadian economy is expected to remain close to its current level over the forecast horizon.
Responses to the spring 2017 Business Outlook Survey indicate that, after two years of weakness, plans to invest in machinery and equipment have become more widespread.
However, many participating firms expect the increase in expenditures to be modest and, in some cases, limited to maintenance.
This suggests that the economic upturn is not yet perceived to be sufficiently certain or sustainable to warrant major investment expenditures.
Canadian firms remain wary, in part, because of concerns about increased protectionism, reduced competitiveness of Canadian firms in the event of corporate tax cuts and regulatory changes in the United States, and possible delays in the implementation of other US policies.
While several surveys suggest that indicators of business sentiment have improved recently, many are still below their historical averages.
Investment in industries outside the oil and gas sector is expected to remain subdued in 2017.
In fact, capital expenditures in the manufacturing sector are expected to be weak, as shown in Statistics Canada's survey of the capital spending intentions of firms.
Nevertheless, rates of capacity utilization for many of these industries are close to their historical highs.
Following the projected expansion of demand, more firms will face capacity constraints, and investment is anticipated to rise.
After contracting for two years, investment in the oil and gas sector is projected to expand moderately, as indicated by increased rig activity and reported capital expenditure plans.
This outlook is supported by the spring Business Outlook Survey, which finds that the investment intentions of firms in regions most affected by the oil price shock have improved but are still low, revealing a sense of cautious optimism.
Nevertheless, prospects for the sector are highly contingent on the outlook for global oil prices and the completion of pipeline projects.
Growth in consumer spending should remain solid in 2017, supported by steady gains in labour income as well as elevated housing and financial wealth.
Looking ahead, consumption growth is expected to moderate broadly in line with growth in disposable income.
Elevated debt will also restrain expenditures somewhat.
The overall ratio of debt to disposable income is expected to edge higher.
In particular, resales and starts have increased significantly in the Greater Toronto Area and in parts of the Golden Horseshoe region.
Price growth in the GTA has accelerated and seems to have entered a phase in which speculation is playing a larger role.
Resales have also increased in Alberta, albeit from previous lows.
Conversely, resales have slowed in the Greater Vancouver Area, and growth remains modest in the rest of the country.
As in the January Report, the Bank expects changes to the federal government's housing finance policy to continue to dampen housing activity.
In addition, the housing market is anticipated to slow somewhat in light of elevated household debt and higher longer-term borrowing costs resulting from the projected gradual rise in global long-term yields.
In light of stronger-than-expected data in most markets in the first quarter of 2017, the contribution of residential investment to real GDP growth in 2017 is expected to be significantly higher than anticipated in January.
This is the primary reason behind the upward revision to GDP growth in 2017.
CPI inflation is expected to dip to 1.7 per cent in the middle of 2017 as the upward pressure from consumer energy prices dissipates.
In addition, weak food prices, electricity rebates and excess supply weigh on inflation.
Starting in the second half of 2017, inflation is projected to fluctuate narrowly around 2 per cent as the impact of the relative price shocks fade at differing speeds.
As excess capacity is absorbed in the first half of 2018, inflation returns sustainably to the 2 per cent target.
Medium- and long-term inflation expectations remain well anchored.
The March 2017 Consensus Economics forecast for CPI inflation is 2.1 per cent in 2017 and 2.0 per cent in 2018.
Based on the past dispersion of private sector forecasts, a reasonable range around - the base-case projection for CPI inflation is 0.3 percentage points.
The prospect of a notable shift toward protectionist global trade policies is the most important source of uncertainty surrounding the outlook.
However, it is impossible to fully quantify the implications of this shift without more clarity about the actual measures and their timing.
The range of possibilities is wide, and the channels through which the measures would affect the economy are complex.
Nevertheless, the Bank has attempted to better balance the risks around the outlook by incorporating at least some of the adverse impact of the elevated uncertainty on business investment and exports into the base case.
Aside from this, the Bank's outlook is subject to several risks emanating from both the external environment and the domestic economy.
The risk of higher potential output has been added, while the risks of higher global long-term interest rates and higher commodity prices are not highlighted in this Report but will continue to be monitored.
While the base case incorporates some strengthening in US economic growth, resulting in part from anticipated fiscal stimulus, an even stronger growth path is also possible.
The ongoing recovery, together with prospective policy changes, such as infrastructure spending and deregulation, could trigger "animal spirits," especially if global policy uncertainty dissipates - that is, they could boost business confidence and lead to an acceleration in the rate of investment, firm creation and innovation.
In particular, the disappointing performance of business investment since the global financial crisis could signal that demographic forces or some other structural factors are more relevant than previously estimated.
In addition, the ongoing shift in the economy's production toward less-capital-intensive services could result in both a different composition and a smaller share of investment in GDP.
While the Bank expects growth in household spending to moderate in the coming quarters, strength could continue for some time if the savings rate (now at its highest level since 2001) declines by more than expected or if the current momentum in the housing market persists.
While this would provide a near-term boost to economic activity, it could further exacerbate the macroeconomic and financial vulnerabilities associated with high household indebtedness and house prices.
Uncertainty associated with the Bank's estimate of potential output is large.
The current level of potential output could be higher than estimated, resulting in more excess supply and less inflationary pressure than currently assessed.
Furthermore, the trajectory of potential output could be higher than anticipated, posing a downside risk to inflation.
As the economy gains strength and approaches full capacity, greater investment, including through new firm creation, could generate a faster expansion of potential output than assumed in the base case.
Moreover, this stronger activity could lead to reabsorption of workers, especially youth, who have left the labour force or were unemployed or underemployed for a long time.
The procyclical effects of this additional firm and employment creation could provide a boost to potential output growth.
The stronger these effects are, the more likely it is for potential output growth to be in the upper part of the Bank's range of estimates and for inflation to fall short of the projection.
Global economic growth continues to strengthen and broaden across countries and regions.
The US economy is expanding at a moderate pace, and there are signs of a more consistent pickup in activity across the euro area.
Growth has resumed in some emerging-market economies that had been in recession.
Both global trade and investment growth have firmed, reflecting the more synchronous expansion worldwide and the bottoming-out of the effects of the oil price shock.
Global economic growth is expected to reach around 3 1/2 per cent in 2017.
Core inflation has eased recently in some advanced economies, owing in large part to temporary factors, while existing slack is being absorbed.
A number of unknowns, particularly with respect to US trade policy, still cloud the outlook.
While the global projection continues to incorporate the judgment that such uncertainty will have a negative impact on trade and investment decisions, these unknowns remain a downside risk to the projection.
Yields on long-term sovereign bonds have edged up since April, but they remain low by historical standards.
The increase in yields has been driven by stronger growth and market expectations of less accommodative monetary policy in advanced economies, including the reduction of the Federal Reserve balance sheet that is anticipated to begin later this year.
Global credit spreads remain near their post-crisis lows, and equity prices are close to past highs.
The US dollar has seen a modest depreciation.
Economic developments in the United States have evolved largely as expected at the time of the April Monetary Policy Report.
First-quarter growth slowed primarily because of transitory factors, including drag from inventories and a weather-related decline in the consumption of utilities.
Recent data, including labour income and consumption, are in line with an expected rebound in growth in the second quarter.
Inflation has been weaker than expected, owing in large part to temporary factors.
The pace of job gains remains consistent with a falling unemployment rate.
The prospects of expansionary US fiscal policy are less clear than they appeared in April, given delays in decision-making processes.
Consequently, the fiscal stimulus assumed in the January and April forecasts has been removed.
US economic fundamentals remain supportive of anticipated growth of around 2 per cent over the projection horizon, slightly above estimated potential growth of 1 3/4 per cent.
Net exports, in contrast, are likely to remain a source of drag, driven partly by the past appreciation of the US dollar.
Recent developments point to more momentum in the euro area than anticipated in April, and growth has become more widespread across member countries.
In the first quarter, every member experienced positive growth, which was the second time this happened in the past year.
Recent indicators, including the Purchasing Managers' Index and measures of consumer confidence, suggest above-potential growth.
Policy uncertainty also appears to have declined in recent months, partly reflecting the outcome of the election in France.
Highly accommodative monetary policy and improved credit growth should continue to support a pace of expansion of around 1 3/4 per cent over the 2017-18 period, before tapering off to 1 1/2 per cent in 2019, as the output gap closes.
In Japan sluggish wage gains and slow potential growth suggest a pace of expansion of around 1 per cent over the projection horizon.
Core inflation has been soft in a number of advanced economies.
In many cases, this reflects remaining excess capacity-especially persistent labour market slack, which has held back wage growth.
Wage and price inflation in these economies should pick up over the projection horizon as above-potential growth continues.
However, the fact that core inflation is soft and has also drifted down recently in some advanced economies, despite diminishing economic slack, requires further analysis.
In large part, this softening can be attributed to temporary factors.
In the United States, for example, increased competition among telecommunications providers and the introduction of certain generic pharmaceuticals have resulted in what are likely one-time declines in price levels.
The slowdown in inflation in several regions, however, suggests that common factors may also be playing a role.
One possible explanation is that inflation expectations may have drifted downward resulting from a long period of below-target inflation in many advanced economies.
Structural changes related to technological advances in the global economy may also be playing a role.
Such advances may have boosted productivity in ways that are not readily measured, adding to global potential growth and thus implying that there is more excess capacity than is captured by standard estimates.
The rise of e-commerce may also have heightened retail competition, by enabling retailers to compete across national borders, thus changing pricing behaviour and making prices more sensitive to new information and global market conditions.
If lower inflation reflects increased global potential and heightened competition, it suggests higher living standards rather than signalling economic weakness.
Evidence on various factors influencing inflation is mixed, and further analysis will be needed to assess their relative importance.
The outlook for China's economy remains consistent with the April Report.
Growth has been uneven over the first half of the year, with a softer-than-expected first quarter offset by signs of stronger momentum in the second quarter.
Credit growth remains elevated but should continue to gradually taper.
Growth in China is expected to slow modestly over the projection horizon, from around 6 1/2 per cent in 2017 to 6 1/4 per cent in 2018-19, alongside an ongoing rebalancing toward more consumption-based growth.
There is more near-term momentum in oil-importing EMEs than was expected at the time of the April Report, reflecting a stronger resumption of growth in some countries, such as Brazil.
Ongoing recoveries in EMEs that had been in recession and progress on economic reforms in some countries should support a pickup in growth from about 4 per cent in 2017 to around 4 1/4 per cent in 2019.
The pace of expansion in oil-exporting countries is projected to rise as the impact of the past oil price decline eases.
Growth in the "rest of the world" grouping is expected to increase from about 1 3/4 per cent in 2017 to around 2 3/4 per cent in 2019.
Benchmark prices for global crude oil have recently averaged US$50 per barrel , about 10 per cent lower than assumed in April.
The announced extension of the production cut by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and other oil producers into early 2018 has not fully relieved market anxiety over stronger-than-anticipated growth in US shale oil production and elevated inventories.
In the near term, risks are tilted to the downside because technological advances may continue to lower the costs of oil production, particularly the production of US shale oil.
Supply could also increase quickly in 2018 if there were a disorderly exit from OPEC's current production agreement.
Although technological advances may continue to exert downward pressures beyond 2018, upside risks are expected to dominate, since past investment cuts may lead to insufficient capacity to meet growing demand.
With respect to non-energy commodities, agricultural prices are higher than in April, partly due to weather-related disruptions in North America and Europe.
Lumber prices are somewhat weaker as a result of softer US housing starts.
Markets had largely priced in the additional anti-dumping duties on Canadian softwood lumber exports announced by the United States in June.
Iron ore prices have declined, in part because of ongoing excess supply.
While demand growth is led by robust household spending, early signs that its sources are becoming more balanced include recent pickups in exports and business investment.
Growth is also broadening across regions and sectors, with more than two-thirds of industries expanding.
Over the projection horizon, the Bank expects the economy to continue to absorb excess capacity by expanding faster than potential output, albeit at a slower pace than in recent quarters.
Economic activity will be supported by rising foreign demand, fiscal stimulus and accommodative monetary and financial conditions.
Increased exports and investment will contribute to the anticipated broadening in the composition of demand, helping to sustain economic expansion as growth in both residential investment and household consumption slows.
Largely reflecting the surge in growth at the start of the year, real GDP is anticipated to expand by 2.8 per cent in 2017 before moderating to 2.0 per cent in 2018 and 1.6 per cent in 2019.
The output gap is expected to close around the end of 2017, earlier than projected in April.
Consumer price index inflation has been soft recently, for the most part as a result of food, electricity and automobile prices.
Excess supply in the economy has also been a factor.
Inflation is forecast to pick up and return close to 2 per cent in the middle of 2018 as relative price movements dissipate and excess capacity is absorbed.
Growth in GDP in the first quarter of 2017 picked up strongly to 3.7 per cent, in line with expectations in the April Report.
Domestic demand was robust: consumption growth strengthened, housing activity rose sharply, and investment in the oil and gas sector rebounded from a prolonged steep decline.
Recent monthly data indicate that export growth has increased while business investment growth has eased.
In particular, relative to the first quarter, oil and gas drilling rig activity has levelled off, and the strong growth in imports of machinery and equipment has slowed.
In addition, activity in the housing sector has abated, largely as a result of sharp declines in resales in Toronto and surrounding areas.
At the same time, growth in consumer spending is projected to slow to a more sustainable pace as the temporary effect of government transfers and special payments on growth in household disposable income diminishes.
As well, motor vehicle sales, which have been stronger than suggested by fundamental drivers of demand, are at an all-time high and are expected to moderate.
Over the past year, a significant amount of excess capacity in the economy has been absorbed, as indicated by a narrowing in the Bank's two measures of economic slack.
Responses to the Bank's summer Business Outlook Survey also suggest an increase in capacity pressures.
This compares with a range of estimated excess capacity between 1 1/2 and 2 1/2 per cent a year earlier.
Several labour market indicators are consistent with this assessment, suggesting that labour market slack is also being absorbed, although with a lag.
In recent months, employment growth has been solid and the unemployment rate has declined.
The Business Outlook Survey also points to a broad-based tightening in labour market conditions, with increasing reports of the prevalence and intensity of labour shortages.
Various wage measures continue to suggest modest growth, although wage growth as measured by the Survey of Employment, Payrolls and Hours has risen to 2.3 per cent on average since the beginning of the year, up from 1.2 per cent on average over 2016.
Other indicators suggest slack remains, particularly in energy-intensive sectors and regions.
Slack is also reflected in elevated levels of long-term unemployment and below-trend average hours worked.
CPI inflation has fallen since the beginning of the year, reaching an estimated 1.4 per cent on average in the second quarter, while two of the Bank's three measures of core inflation have also continued to decline.
The slowdown in inflation can be explained mainly by easing consumer energy and automobile price inflation .
Both slower gasoline price inflation and the electricity rebates from the Ontario government have weighed on consumer energy prices.
CPI inflation and the core measures are also being held down by current and past economic slack, but this effect has declined in recent quarters.
In addition, it is possible that global structural factors, as discussed on page 4, could be contributing to low inflation in Canada.
The Bank projects that real GDP growth will remain above that of potential output and broaden further but will moderate over the projection horizon.
Real GDP is anticipated to expand by 2.8 per cent in 2017, 2.0 per cent in 2018 and 1.6 per cent in 2019.
Consequently, economic slack is absorbed more quickly, with the output gap now anticipated to close around the end of 2017.
Growth in 2019 is projected to approach estimated potential output growth.
Growth is expected to continue to broaden across sectors and regions because the economy has largely adjusted to the decline in oil prices that began in the second half of 2014.
In particular, the drag on investment spending and economic growth from lower oil prices is mostly over, and growth in commodity-related activity is resuming.
This economic adjustment has been supported by accommodative monetary and financial conditions and the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar.
However, the adverse effect on incomes lingers, particularly in energy-intensive provinces.
At the same time, production in other goods industries is also picking up, while the solid expansion in the service sector persists.
Results from the summer Business Outlook Survey also suggest that growth will continue to broaden.
For example, forward-looking indicators of business activity have generally strengthened across regions and sectors.
Export growth is projected to increase as foreign demand strengthens, leading to increased investment and an expansion in productive capacity.
Government spending is also expected to boost growth over the projection horizon, reflecting previously announced fiscal measures.
In particular, public investment is expected to be a significant contributor to economic growth over the near term.
Meanwhile, household spending will continue to support growth, but its contribution is anticipated to moderate.
Consumption growth will be restrained by elevated levels of household debt and higher longer-term borrowing costs as global long-term yields are projected to gradually rise.
While Canada's exports have experienced a structural loss of global market share, they have continued to recover and are expected to keep expanding over the projection horizon, roughly in line with the broad-based growth in foreign demand.
In particular, overall export growth is expected to pick up in the coming quarters - an assessment that is consistent with the summer Business Outlook Survey.
Many respondents noted that their positive US outlook was a good sign for sales, citing as examples solid activity in the US construction sector, increased demand for information technology services and oil, and increased tourism to Canada.
However, as anticipated in April, changes in the production mandates of multinational auto assemblers mean there will be reductions in motor vehicle production later in 2017; as a result, exports of motor vehicles and parts will decline.
Growth in commodity exports is anticipated to increase moderately over the projection.
Prices for oil and base metals have declined recently, limiting production growth in these sectors.
Conditions are more favourable for some other non-energy commodities; for example, growth in agricultural production and exports is expected to rise over the projection.
Imports are also expected to grow modestly, supported by growth in domestic demand - particularly consumption and investment.
The effect of the past depreciation of the dollar is evident in some sectors such as tourism, since many Canadians are opting to vacation in Canada rather than abroad.
However, there is limited evidence so far in other sectors that the effect of the dollar has led to domestic production replacing imports.
As with exports, business investment is anticipated to increase over the projection horizon, triggered by expanding economic activity in both the non-resource and resource sectors.
The expansion in the resource sector indicates that the adjustment in the level of investment in this sector in 2015 and 2016 to the past oil price shock is largely complete.
Growth in investment outside the resource sector is expected to increase moderately in the near term as more firms expand their capacity to meet future demand.
Nevertheless, the recovery in business investment is anticipated to remain below what would normally be expected based on historical experience, partly reflecting structural challenges such as slower labour force growth as well as concerns related to US policy uncertainty.
Investment in the oil and gas sector rebounded sharply in the first quarter but is expected to expand gradually over the projection.
The outlook is supported by an analysis of the capital expenditure plans of oil and gas firms and the Bank's consultations with the energy sector.
Firms expressed a sense of cautious optimism and are prudently implementing their investment plans.
Investment prospects for the sector are, however, highly contingent on the outlook for global oil prices, which have recently declined.
The summer Business Outlook Survey provides evidence that business sentiment continues to improve, which bodes well for investment.
Intentions to increase spending on machinery and equipment over the next year remain broad-based across regions and sectors.
Household expenditures are forecast to remain robust in the near term, supported by the expansion of employment, an increase in wage growth and strong credit growth.
There are signs that a rebound in incomes is under way in energy-intensive provinces, while incomes outside these provinces continue to register solid gains.
Moreover, the strength in consumer spending seen through much of the country is spreading to energy-intensive provinces - a trend that is expected to continue.
High household indebtedness and a slowdown in the housing market are also anticipated to weigh on consumer spending.
Until very recently, housing market activity had been quite strong in some regions.
Of note was the sharp rise in resales and starts through the early spring in Toronto and surrounding areas.
In addition, markets appeared to have bottomed out in Alberta, with sales up from their levels a year ago.
National house price growth reached 20 per cent on a year-over-year basis in April, led by strong price gains in Toronto and surrounding areas and, to a lesser extent, in the Greater Vancouver Area.
Price growth in other parts of Canada was much more subdued.
However, a recent sharp decline in resales and moderation in starts in Toronto and surrounding areas have contributed to a slowdown in housing market activity since April.
The Ontario Fair Housing Plan has likely played a role, but it is too early to assess the extent of its effect.
Looking ahead, residential investment is anticipated to contribute less to overall growth.
Macroprudential and housing policy measures, as well as higher longer-term borrowing costs resulting from the projected gradual rise in global long-term yields, are all expected to weigh on housing expenditures.
CPI inflation is anticipated to slow somewhat further in the third quarter, to average 1.3 per cent, owing in large part to the last installment of Ontario electricity rebates in July.
Inflation is then projected to rise and reach close to 2 per cent in the middle of 2018.
Two key relative price movements are expected to together add about 0.6 percentage points to inflation.
First, food price inflation, which has been weak for some time, is expected to rebound as agricultural prices rise and as the disinflationary effects of increased competition in the retail food sector fade.
Second, the dampening impact of the electricity rebates in Ontario on inflation is anticipated to gradually dissipate.
In addition, the expected closing of the output gap will have an impact.
In the third quarter of this year, the effect of excess supply subtracts 0.2 percentage points from inflation.
As excess supply is absorbed, inflation is expected to return sustainably close to the 2 per cent target.
The June 2017 Consensus Economics forecast for CPI inflation is 1.9 per cent in 2017 and 2.0 per cent in 2018.
The possibility of a notable shift toward protectionist global trade policies remains a source of uncertainty surrounding the outlook.
However, it is difficult to fully quantify the implications of this shift without more clarity about the actual policy measures and their timing.
The Bank applied judgment to capture the adverse effects of this uncertainty on business investment and exports in the base case.
As in April, this helps to better balance the risks around the outlook.
The Bank's outlook for inflation is subject to several upside and downside risks originating from both the external environment and the domestic economy.
As in past reports, the focus is on a selection of risks identified as most important for the projected path for inflation, drawing from a larger set of risks taken into account in the forecast.
First, sluggish business investment in Canada has been incorporated into a broader risk that also includes weaker export growth.
Second, higher potential output in Canada is now part of a more comprehensive risk that covers persistent weakness in global and Canadian inflation.
Inflation in some advanced economies, including Canada, has slowed.
While much of the recent slowdown can be accounted for by temporary factors, it is possible that global structural factors, discussed on page 4, may be playing a larger role than believed.
Over the projection horizon, these structural factors could exert disinflationary pressure in Canada and abroad that is not fully captured in the base-case projection.
Also, as discussed in the April Report, the decline in the measures of core inflation in Canada could indicate that the current level of potential output is higher than estimated, resulting in more excess supply and less inflationary pressure.
In addition, as the economy approaches full capacity, firm creation and business investment could rise by more than expected, and workers who have left the labour force or who were underemployed would be fully re-employed, boosting potential output over the projection period.
While the base case includes US economic growth that is above the rate of potential, an even stronger growth path is also possible.
The ongoing recovery together with prospective policy changes, such as fiscal stimulus and deregulation, could trigger "animal spirits," or a surge in business confidence that leads to an acceleration in the rate of investment, firm creation, innovation and productivity growth.
While the Bank's projection for exports and business investment is cautious, there is a risk that competitiveness challenges may be stronger than anticipated.
A further loss in the market share of Canadian exporters could postpone prospective investment projects or move some investment activities abroad.
The disappointing performance of business investment since the 2007-09 global financial crisis could also indicate that demographic forces or other structural factors are more relevant than previously estimated.
Strong motor vehicle and other retail sales combined with the high level of consumer confidence point to robust underlying consumption.
While the Bank expects growth in consumption to slow in the coming quarters, its recent strength could persist if wage and household income growth were to increase faster than expected as the labour market approaches full employment.
Moreover, the recent strength in credit growth could persist longer than anticipated.
While this would provide a boost to economic activity, it could further exacerbate the macroeconomic and financial vulnerabilities associated with high household indebtedness.
Imbalances in the Canadian housing market are an important vulnerability, particularly in areas where house prices have grown at a faster pace than can be readily explained by fundamentals, such as in the greater Toronto and Vancouver areas.
A regional house price correction would have important adverse effects on residential investment, related consumption and real estate services in the affected regions.
The fall in house prices could further weigh on consumption through negative wealth and collateral effects and could be amplified by the high levels of household indebtedness.
Growth in the United States rebounded in the second quarter, and the expansion in the euro area appears to have firmed.
Economic activity is also showing signs of improvement in some oil-exporting countries and emerging-market economies that were previously in recession.
Global growth is projected to average around 3 1/2 per cent over the 2017-19 period, in line with the projections in the July Monetary Policy Report.
Inflation has remained below target across most advanced economies, reflecting past excess capacity, still-weak wage growth and, in some cases, temporary factors.
Inflation in wages and prices is expected to rise gradually as existing slack is absorbed.
The global outlook remains subject to substantial uncertainty, notably around US trade policy as well as geopolitical developments.
The Bank's base-case projection continues to include some judgment that acknowledges the potential adverse effects of uncertainty on investment.
Global financial conditions remain accommodative.
Yields on long-term sovereign bonds have changed little on average since July; in particular, in the United States, Germany and Japan, yields have fluctuated within a narrow range.
Stock market indexes in advanced economies have continued to climb amid improving economic sentiment and conditions.
The US Federal Reserve's process of normalizing its balance sheet that began in October is expected to contribute to a modest and gradual steepening of the US yield curve.
However, the announcement of these plans in September had a minimal impact on yields.
Partly reflecting increased uncertainty over US trade and fiscal policy, as well as softer inflation prospects, the US dollar had been weakening in 2017 against a basket of currencies, although it has regained some strength recently.
Economic growth in the United States rebounded in the second quarter, as anticipated in the July Report.
Consumption growth improved after a weak first quarter.
Business investment growth remained robust, supported by, but not limited to, the ongoing recovery in energy investment.
In contrast, residential investment contracted following two quarters of strong growth, as spending on renovations and commissions on sales of existing homes declined.
The recent hurricanes had a devastating impact on affected communities, with significant albeit transitory aggregate economic effects.
Consumption, housing and business investment are likely to be negatively affected, resulting in a lower outlook for growth in gross domestic product in the third quarter.
Recovery and reconstruction efforts are expected to provide a modest boost to economic activity starting in the fourth quarter.
Overall, economic fundamentals remain consistent with projected GDP growth of about 2 per cent on average over 2017-19.
Net exports, however, will likely continue to be a drag on growth.
As in July, the Bank's base-case projection does not incorporate any new fiscal or trade measures.
While sizable tax cuts are under active consideration, material uncertainty remains about whether agreement will be reached on such a package and, if so, its size, timing and design.
If stimulative fiscal measures were enacted, growth could be higher than projected.
Likewise, growth could be lower if protectionist trade policies led to a generalized decline in cross-border co-operation.
Second-quarter growth in the euro area was stronger than expected and remained broad-based across member countries.
Growth should moderate gradually in 2018, reaching about 1 1/2 per cent in 2019, roughly in line with the pace of expansion of potential output.
Inflation has remained soft and generally below target in several advanced economies.
Given the lag between economic activity and inflation, the ongoing strength in growth can be expected to contribute to improvements in labour market conditions and, therefore, a gradual firming in wage and price inflation.
The softness in core inflation in advanced economies has mainly been due to past excess capacity.
However, in contrast to the United States, the decline in many countries that started in 2016 was likely associated with prior appreciation of their currencies and with falling prices of goods imported from emerging markets, notably China.
The effects of these factors appear to have largely dissipated, as suggested by the uptick in inflation in the euro area and Japan in recent months.
In the United States, core inflation started declining in 2017 despite the depreciation of the US dollar.
A large part of this slowdown can be attributed to lower prices for services, such as telecommunications.
Looking ahead, core inflation in the United States is expected to reach 2 per cent by 2019 as a tight labour market exerts upward pressure on wage inflation.
While the Bank assesses inflation dynamics through the lens of economic slack and inflation expectations, the continuing softness in inflation across a number of advanced economies calls for further analysis.
One possible explanation is that the behaviour of inflation in advanced economies has changed, and inflation is now less responsive to changes in economic slack than in the past.
Another possibility is that technological advances, such as the rise of e-commerce and the digital economy, may be playing a role.
So far, available evidence suggests that the overall effects of these technological factors on inflation are small, but the Bank will continue to examine the potential role of these and other factors.
Economic activity in China has been somewhat stronger than anticipated, with GDP expanding robustly in the third quarter.
Nevertheless, growth is expected to soften in the coming quarters, mainly as a result of earlier policy measures targeting the housing and financial sectors and a smaller contribution from fiscal policy.
Despite some progress on financial sector deleveraging, financial stability risks remain elevated as total credit continues to expand at a strong pace.
Looking ahead, economic growth is expected to moderate from 6.8 per cent in 2017 to 6.3 per cent in 2019 as it continues to shift toward a more sustainable pace and composition.
For oil-importing EMEs, the economic environment has remained generally favourable, with narrow credit spreads and sustained capital inflows.
GDP growth should average about 4 per cent over 2017-19, supported by ongoing recoveries in countries previously in recession and progress on growth-enhancing reforms.
In India, economic growth has been dragged down by the lingering adverse effects of the currency exchange initiative launched in late 2016 as well as by the transitory costs associated with the introduction of the national goods and services tax in July.
Notwithstanding the effects on near-term growth, these and other major reforms are expected to support medium-term growth in India.
Growth in the "rest of the world" grouping is expected to increase from about 1 1/2 per cent in 2017 to around 2 3/4 per cent in 2019.
The economic adjustment in oil-exporting countries is progressing as the impact from past declines in oil prices eases.
By convention, oil prices are assumed to remain close to their recent average of about US$55 per barrel , roughly US$5 higher than assumed in July.
Prices have been supported by stronger-than-expected demand over the summer, with US demand for gasoline reaching a five-year high.
Declines in US crude oil inventories over the last six months and a recent stabilization in the number of active US oil rigs suggest that the oil market is rebalancing.
Over the near term, risks to the oil price assumption are tilted to the downside.
Prices could be lower if excess supply results from a pickup in shale drilling activity in the United States or from a deterioration in compliance with agreed production cuts by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and some other oil producers.
Prices of some non-energy commodities have also increased since July.
Spot prices for base metals have risen by about 12 per cent in response to a combination of stronger global demand and commodity-specific supply factors.
Strong steel production in China over the summer supported the rise in prices of certain base metals, such as iron, nickel and zinc.
In addition, higher aluminum prices have been supported by cuts to capacity in China, while concerns over further disruptions to mining activity in the Philippines have boosted nickel prices.
Lumber prices have increased, driven mainly by wildfires in British Columbia and the western United States and potential supply disruptions caused by the hurricanes in the United States and the Caribbean.
In contrast, agricultural prices have declined following a seasonal drop in livestock prices and expectations of stronger global crop yields.
Agricultural prices are expected to stay near current lows, while some modest growth in prices of base metals, excluding iron, should be supported by strong demand and ongoing declines in inventories.
The Bank of Canada's non-energy commodity price index is therefore expected to remain roughly flat over the projection horizon, given these contrasting underlying outlooks.
Economic activity continued to grow rapidly in the second quarter of 2017, exceeding expectations at the time of the July Report.
Growth continued to be broadly based across regions and industries and has become more balanced across components of aggregate demand.
Consumption and residential investment were robust, and growth in exports and business investment picked up.
In this context, excess capacity has declined more rapidly than expected, and the Bank now estimates the output gap to be between -0.5 and 0.5 per cent in the third quarter.
Looking ahead, the level of economic activity will be supported by rising foreign demand and the recent firming of commodity prices, still-accommodative monetary and financial conditions, and public infrastructure spending.
The economy is expected to progress on a more sustainable path: the total contribution to growth from consumption and residential investment is projected to decline, in part because of recent interest rate increases, while the contribution from exports is expected to improve and that from business investment to remain steady.
The Bank's projection incorporates the effects of three important developments since July, namely, the policy rate increases in July and September, the appreciation of the Canadian dollar and the increase in commodity prices.
It also reflects the Bank's current assessment of the following key issues: the level and future growth rates of potential output; the evolution of wages and inflation, together with the potential implications of globalization and technology; and the sensitivity of the economy to interest rates given elevated household indebtedness.
Largely as a result of the robust pace of growth in the first half of the year, real GDP is forecast to grow at 3.1 per cent in 2017.
Relative to the July projection, growth for the year is revised up, mainly because of unexpected strength in household consumption and business investment in the second quarter.
After moderating in the second half of 2017, GDP is expected to grow by 2.1 per cent in 2018 and 1.5 per cent in 2019.
As such, economic activity is forecast to remain close to full capacity and at times possibly modestly above, depending on how the supply side of the economy evolves.
Consumer price index inflation has recently picked up from low levels, reflecting higher gasoline prices, dissipating drag from food inflation, and improving economic conditions.
Inflation is expected to continue to rise toward 2 per cent as the temporary effects of past fluctuations in food and electricity prices fade.
Compared with the July inflation projection, the stronger Canadian dollar is expected to have a dampening impact in 2018, while the more rapid absorption of economic slack is expected to have an opposite, albeit smaller, effect.
In this context, inflation is projected to increase to close to 2 per cent over the course of 2018 and to remain around 2 per cent until the end of 2019.
The economy grew at a rapid pace in the first half of 2017, averaging just over 4 per cent growth at an annual rate.
Consumption growth has become more widespread across regions, since the rebound in incomes in energy-producing provinces is now more entrenched.
A broad-based expansion in business investment and a surge in energy exports were also contributors to growth.
However, after a strong first quarter, housing activity pulled back in the second quarter.
The housing decline was driven by a contraction of resale activity in the Toronto market, which was partly in response to the measures introduced by the Ontario government in April.
Overall, real GDP growth in the first half of the year was widespread, with more than two-thirds of industries and most major demand components contributing to the expansion.
Real GDP growth is expected to moderate to a still solid pace close to 2 per cent at an annual rate over the second half of the year as growth in consumption and investment slows and exports temporarily decline in the third quarter.
Still, consumption growth is expected to remain solid, supported by ongoing growth in employment and income and elevated consumer confidence.
The Canada child benefit introduced in 2016 will continue to support the level of consumption, although the effects on growth have dissipated.
Nonetheless, business investment growth is expected to pick up later in the year, buoyed in part by the launch of some large projects.
The temporary decline in exports in the third quarter is largely due to scheduled reductions in motor vehicle production and the unwinding of temporary factors that boosted growth in the spring.
However, with the reversal of these temporary effects, export growth is anticipated to rebound in the fourth quarter, in line with foreign demand.
Housing activity is estimated to have declined further in the third quarter, dampened by the slowdown in Ontario, but is expected to increase in the fourth quarter, as resales have recently started to pick up.
Robust growth over recent quarters has contributed to a rapid narrowing of the output gap, and the Bank estimates that the Canadian economy is now operating close to capacity.
This estimate incorporates an assessment of the impact of strong recent investment on potential output growth.
The robust growth of demand, combined with declining excess capacity, is providing an important incentive for businesses to invest and hire more workers.
New firms could also be created, and workers could increase their hours worked or participation in the labour force.
Growth in employment has remained strong at the national level and has been broad-based across sectors and regions.
The unemployment rate has continued to fall, but its decline likely overstates the degree of improvement in the labour market.
In particular, the Bank's labour market indicator, a composite indicator, is still relatively high.
Its current level reflects the fact that the long-term unemployment rate remains elevated, average hours worked remain low and wage growth continues to be modest.
With recent productivity gains exceeding wage increases, labour cost pressures have been relatively low.
Moreover, according to the autumn Business Outlook Survey, there is clear evidence of ongoing slack in energy-producing regions.
As well, binding labour shortages appear to be prevalent only in British Columbia and in specific sectors.
Taken together, these developments indicate that labour markets are not yet a source of inflationary pressures and that opportunities for further expansions of employment remain.
CPI inflation has increased in recent months, largely as expected.
CPI inflation rose from a trough of 1 per cent in June to 1.6 per cent in September, mostly reflecting dynamics in gasoline prices.
Hurricane Harvey's disruption of refining capacity temporarily boosted gasoline prices and, thus, inflation by 0.2 percentage points in September.
Additional contributors to the recent rise in CPI inflation were the fading effects of factors such as weak inflation in food prices and dissipating economic slack.
However, these two factors, together with the electricity rebates in Ontario, still contribute to keeping CPI inflation below the 2 per cent target.
Moreover, the recent appreciation of the Canadian dollar is estimated to reduce projected inflation.
Several other factors, including digitalization, may be having some dampening impact on inflation.
Inflation in the second half of 2017 is expected to be similar on average to that forecast in July.
The impact of the change in the exchange rate is slightly greater, while that from economic slack is slightly less.
Core inflation measures also started to drift upward in recent months, consistent with declining slack in the past and the diminishing drag from weak food inflation.
These levels are roughly consistent with estimates of the evolution of excess capacity over previous quarters.
Financial conditions for both households and businesses remain broadly stimulative but have become less so since the middle of this year.
Market interest rates have risen, partly reflecting improvements in economic conditions in Canada and related increases in the Bank's policy rate in July and September.
The rise in bank funding costs prompted financial institutions to raise mortgage and consumer credit rates.
For example, five-year fixed mortgage rates have increased by about 50 basis points since the July Report.
The estimated effective rate for businesses has increased by about 50 basis points since early June, in line with business prime rates.
In that context, the Bank's Business Outlook Survey and Senior Loan Officer Survey both report that, aside from the overall increase in interest rates, business lending conditions were broadly unchanged during the third quarter of 2017.
The surveys noted that recent healthy firm performance and competition among lenders helped ease non-price borrowing conditions for businesses, while some firms in commodity and related industries saw a modest rise in borrowing costs.
The Canadian dollar has appreciated against the US dollar, reflecting higher commodity prices, narrower US-Canada interest rate spreads and the weaker US dollar.
The US dollar remains somewhat lower than it was in July, despite firming in recent weeks.
The Bank projects that economic growth will slow and quarterly growth rates will average close to potential growth over 2018-19.
Solid growth of foreign demand is expected to support export growth and promote business investment.
Consumption and residential investment are projected to moderate as households respond to less-accommodative financial conditions and as macroprudential and other housing policy measures continue to weigh on activity in the housing market.
Government spending is expected to boost growth over the coming quarters, reflecting previously announced fiscal measures.
The solid expansion of the service sector is projected to continue, and the recent strength in goods-producing industries is now more entrenched.
Results from the Business Outlook Survey also suggest that strong indicators of future sales remain widespread across regions and sectors.
After rebounding in the first part of 2017, business investment is expected to grow at a more moderate, but steady, pace over the projection period.
With the economy operating close to capacity, ongoing increases in household and foreign demand, solid profit margins and robust business confidence are expected to support growth in business investment.
Results from the autumn Business Outlook Survey indicate that while intentions to increase investment spending have come down from recent high levels, they remain widespread across sectors and regions.
Data on business investment may not fully capture firm expenditures to increase capacity and productivity.
For example, spending on cloud computing or other information technology infrastructure services is often treated as an operating expense rather than as an investment per se.
Yet, such innovation may lead to stronger productivity and potential output for a given level of investment spending.
The results of both the Business Outlook Survey and consultations conducted by the Bank indicate that businesses expect to continue to focus on digital technologies to grow their productive capacity.
The firming of global commodity prices and the improvement in the balance sheets of oil and gas companies will support a gradual expansion of commodity-related investment, but growth prospects are limited, given the assumed outlook for oil prices.
Non-commodity business investment is expected to expand with the growth of demand in Canada's major trading partners.
Nevertheless, uncertainty about US trade policy and structural challenges, including expected low trend labour force and productivity growth in Canada relative to history, are expected to continue to restrain investment growth.
As expected in July, Canadian export growth has shown temporary weakness in recent months, partly due to the expected retrenchment in automobile production in the third quarter.
Over the projection, exports are anticipated to grow roughly in line with strengthening foreign demand.
Over the past year, the growth of exports of services, driven by transportation and travel services, has been solid and should continue at a similar pace.
Non-commodity goods exports have also picked up recently, and several goods components, including industrial machinery and equipment, plastics and rubber products, and food and beverage products, are expected to benefit from global growth.
As a result of several ongoing challenges, the growth of non-commodity goods exports is expected to remain moderate.
Deteriorating competitiveness and the relocation of production outside Canada by some multinational firms have contributed to a loss of productive capacity and a reduction in the global market share of Canadian goods exporters.
Uncertainty about proposed trade measures and the status of trade agreements is also assumed to be hindering Canada's ability to benefit from an improving global outlook.
Growth of commodity exports is expected to be modest over the next two years, since production and exports have been restrained by limited investment in new capacity in the sector in recent years.
Over the longer term, these exports could grow more strongly if commodity prices increased further and investment and productive capacity expand.
Consumption growth is projected to moderate and residential investment is expected to contract modestly over 2018-19.
Several factors are expected to weigh on household spending, notably, an anticipated slowdown in the growth of disposable income.
Moreover, while financial conditions remain broadly stimulative, higher interest rates have increased the cost of new borrowing and of servicing outstanding debt.
The higher borrowing costs are likely to dampen household spending, particularly on durable goods and housing.
Given higher overall debt levels, such spending is expected to be more sensitive to interest rate changes than in previous cycles (see the Appendix for a description of recent changes to the modelling of household consumption and debt).
While higher interest rates on consumer credit, home equity lines of credit and variable - rate mortgages affect borrowers immediately, the impact of the recent rate increases on holders of fixed-rate mortgages will be gradual.
Mortgages with fixed rates of three to five years represent a large share of the total debt of households, and income gains should help fixed-rate mortgage holders to continue servicing their debt at renewal.
Other factors are also expected to weigh on housing activity.
The level of housing starts is projected to decrease in the coming years, in line with an anticipated gradual slowing of population growth.
Moreover, macroprudential and other housing policy measures, while contributing to more sustainable debt profiles going forward, are also expected to weigh on housing demand.
In particular, the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions recently announced new guidelines aimed at reinforcing residential mortgage underwriting practices.
These guidelines are expected to subtract about 0.2 per cent from the level of GDP by the end of 2019.
Taken together, recent interest rate increases and macroprudential policy changes are likely to have a moderating influence on residential investment as some prospective homebuyers respond by taking on smaller mortgages while others delay purchases.
CPI inflation is expected to increase to around 2 per cent CPI inflation is anticipated to average 1.4 per cent in the fourth quarter and to move up to around 2 per cent in the second half of 2018, staying close to the target thereafter.
In the base-case projection, the gradual increase in projected inflation primarily reflects the unwinding of temporary factors.
Downward pressures from below-average growth in food prices should completely dissipate by the beginning of 2018, while those from the electricity rebates in Ontario should last until the middle of the year.
After subtracting an estimated 0.2 percentage points from inflation in the second half of 2017, pass-through effects of the stronger Canadian dollar are expected to become stronger, with a peak impact on inflation of -0.5 percentage points in the second quarter of 2018, before fading by the end of 2018.
The September 2017 Consensus Economics forecast for CPI inflation is 1.6 per cent in 2017 and 1.9 per cent in 2018.
A complementary perspective is provided using statistical analysis of the Bank's forecast errors, which suggests that a 50 per cent confidence interval around the base-case projection widens from 0.3 percentage points in the fourth quarter of 2017 to 0.6 percentage points by the end of 2019.
The Canadian economy is operating close to capacity, and inflation is expected to increase to close to 2 per cent over the next several quarters.
In this context, the Bank is focusing on assessing the importance of four key issues.
The Bank is assessing the extent to which potential growth increases with strong demand, given that the economy is close to capacity.
The base-case projection incorporates some effect of strong demand growth on potential.
Global and technological factors have lowered inflation in advanced economies in recent years.
Their impact on Canadian inflation to date does not appear to be significant, but work in this area continues.
In the Bank's projection, the dynamics of inflation in Canada reflect the temporary effects of sector-specific factors, exchange rate pass-through and the evolution of economic slack.
Despite recent labour market improvements, wage gains remain subdued and are likely to increase only gradually.
The projection builds in scope for greater labour market participation and hours worked before wage increases would add meaningful upward pressure on inflation.
Finally, household spending is being influenced by high levels of household debt and various macroprudential and other measures targeting the housing market.
The Bank's main policy model has been revised to reflect that households are more responsive to interest rates when they are carrying elevated debt loads.
The projection also incorporates estimates of the effects of the new housing measures.
The Bank will continue to monitor all of these issues, given their significance for the inflation outlook.
The prospect of a notable shift toward protectionist global trade policies is the most important source of uncertainty affecting the outlook.
Recent developments, such as the use of targeted discretionary measures by the United States, are increasing uncertainty about the status of current and future trade agreements.
However, the Bank has chosen not to fully quantify the implications of more protectionist policies.
More clarity is needed in order to narrow the range of possibilities, particularly regarding the specific details and timing of any policy changes.
Nevertheless, as in July, the Bank attempts to better balance the risks around the outlook by incorporating at least some of the adverse impact of the elevated global uncertainty into the base case.
Aside from the uncertainty around global trade policies, the Bank's outlook for inflation is subject to several upside and downside risks originating from both the external environment and the domestic economy.
Overall, the Bank assesses that the risks to the projected path for Canadian inflation are roughly balanced.
As in past reports, the focus is on a selection of risks identified as the most important, drawing from a larger set of risks considered in the forecast.
The evolution of risks since July is summarized in Table 4.
The risk of weaker exports and sluggish business investment in Canada has been modified to focus on the possibility of increased protectionist pressures and competitiveness challenges.
As in July, the risk of higher potential output is discussed in conjunction with the risk of persistent weakness in inflation, highlighting the uncertainty surrounding the effects of structural factors and prolonged excess supply on inflation.
While the future of US trade policy is still unknown, a protectionist shift in the United States is already evident in several discretionary decisions.
For example, the US administration has imposed countervailing duties on Canadian aircraft, and uncertainty around the outcome of the North American Free Trade Agreement renegotiations is elevated.
Other negative effects are also possible if additional US measures are implemented.
Although the Bank's projection for exports is cautious, there is a risk that exports will fall short of expectations, given the growing protectionist pressures and continuing competitiveness challenges.
In this context, firms may respond to the growth of foreign demand by expanding their offshore production capacity rather than exporting from Canada.
This movement offshore could lead to an additional drag on Canadian exports and business investment, since firms would hold back on expanding domestic capacity.
While many of the tame inflationary pressures in Canada and most advanced economies in recent years can be accounted for by economic slack and temporary factors, global structural factors may be playing a larger role than currently believed.
As well, the trajectory of potential output could be higher than anticipated.
As the economy approaches full capacity, business investment could rise by more than expected, and stronger economic activity could lead to the return of workers who had left the labour force or were underemployed.
While significant uncertainty surrounds these effects, the level of potential output could be as much as 1 per cent higher than expected by the end of 2020.
The stronger these effects are, the more likely firmer economic growth could be generated without creating additional inflationary pressures relative to the base case.
Uncertainty also surrounds the persistence of the effect of past excess supply on inflation and whether the relationship between the output gap and inflation has weakened.
Efforts toward deregulation and prospects for sizable federal corporate and personal tax cuts in the United States could boost US economic growth.
Deregulation, if it enhances competitiveness in an environment of accommodative financial conditions, elevated equity prices and corporate profits, could help trigger animal spirits.
A further improvement in business confidence could lead to an acceleration in the pace of investment, firm creation, innovation and productivity growth.
In addition, potential tax cuts could provide a modest boost to consumption and investment growth, although the precise effects will depend on the timing, magnitude and distribution of any cuts.
Strong spending, combined with elevated consumer confidence, points to underlying strength.
While recent data on motor vehicle and retail sales indicate a slowdown in the coming quarters, the recent strength of consumption could persist if growth in wages and household incomes were to increase faster than expected as the labour market approaches full employment.
Moreover, the recent robust credit growth could last longer than anticipated.
This would provide a boost to economic activity, but it could further exacerbate the macroeconomic and financial vulnerabilities associated with high household indebtedness.
A pronounced drop in house prices in overheated markets Imbalances in the Canadian housing market remain an important vulnerability, particularly in the greater Toronto and Vancouver areas.
In the context of elevated levels of consumer indebtedness, households could be even more sensitive to interest rate increases than assumed in the base case, which could trigger an adjustment in house prices in regions with elevated valuations.
A large regional decline in house prices would have important adverse effects on residential investment and on related consumption and real estate services in the affected regions.
Overall, a pronounced decline in house prices in some regions could have a material negative impact on the economic outlook in those regions, with modest direct spillovers to the rest of the country.
Global economic growth continues to strengthen and broaden across countries.
The US economy remains robust, while growth has also firmed in other advanced economies and in many emerging-market economies.
The global growth profile is modestly above that in the October Monetary Policy Report, averaging about 3 1/2 per cent over 2017-19.
Meanwhile, although inflation in advanced economies remains below target, it is expected to rise.
The outlook remains subject to considerable uncertainty, mainly around geopolitical developments and trade policy.
For Canada and Mexico, the estimated drag on investment and trade associated with trade-policy uncertainty has been increased relative to October, reflecting greater uncertainty around renegotiations of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
However, the Bank's base-case scenario is predicated on existing trade arrangements over the projection horizon.
The US economy is projected to grow at a solid pace The US economy has been expanding at a robust pace.
Third-quarter growth was higher than expected, mainly reflecting stronger net exports.
Recent monthly data, such as on household consumption and housing starts, also indicate greater momentum.
While wage growth remains modest, the labour market has continued to improve.
The unemployment rate has been falling, the prime-age participation rate has been rising and recent job gains have been strong - the average number of new jobs per month over the past six months is now about 165,000.
Indicators of business and consumer confidence have also remained elevated.
The Bank assumes that reductions in personal and corporate taxes will accumulate to roughly US$600 billion by the end of 2019.
The boost to household disposable income from reduced personal taxes is expected to stimulate household expenditures.
However, this effect will likely be relatively modest since the distribution of tax cuts favours high-income individuals who tend to spend a smaller share of any tax savings.
The reduction in the federal corporate tax rate, combined with more generous tax treatment of capital expenditures, should prompt additional capital spending by firms.
Taken together, these tax reforms are expected to boost the level of gross domestic product by 0.5 per cent in 2019.
Overall, growth is projected to average about 2 1/2 per cent over the 2017-19 period, an increase from the October Report based on both greater-than-expected momentum and the tax reform legislation.
Consumption is expected to expand at a healthy pace, based on robust fundamentals, including a strong labour market.
Business investment should be supported by the projected solid pace of expansion of private demand as well as the tax changes.
The base-case projection is subject to considerable uncertainty.
Importantly, growth could be weaker if materially more protectionist trade policies are implemented.
Growth in the euro area has been stronger than expected and continues to be broad-based across countries in the region.
Recent data, notably improving labour market indicators and elevated indicators of economic sentiment, suggest greater momentum.
In Japan, third-quarter growth was stronger than anticipated.
Measures of business and economic conditions have been rising, indicating stronger growth prospects than previously assessed.
Based on these developments, the growth outlook for the euro area and Japan has been revised up.
The pace of expansion in both economies is still expected to moderate over the projection horizon.
Inflation in advanced economies has shown some upward movement.
Core inflation has ticked up modestly in some jurisdictions, although it has been at low levels in most countries, mainly reflecting past labour market slack.
Inflation in US core personal consumption expenditures has picked up, mostly due to higher prices for services, notably financial and telecommunication services.
Wage inflation and price inflation in advanced economies are expected to edge up gradually as growth remains above potential and capacity pressures build.
This rise is also consistent with market expectations for inflation, which appear to have stabilized and, in some cases, started to drift up after being on a gradual downward trend through the first half of 2017.
Economic activity in China is evolving largely as anticipated.
Growth is projected to moderate from about 6 3/4 per cent in 2017 to about 6 1/4 per cent in 2019, as the economy rebalances toward a more sustainable and higher quality growth path.
This profile is consistent with the Chinese administration's emphasis on structural reforms, on protecting the environment and on addressing financial sector vulnerabilities.
In other oil-importing EMEs, growth is projected to average about 4 1/4 per cent over 2017-19.
Strength is particularly evident in emerging Asia, where, in some countries, there has been notable progress on growth enhancing reforms.
The growth profile has been revised up over 2017-18 based on recent widespread strength in economic activity in much of emerging Asia and emerging Europe.
In contrast, the pickup in growth in the "rest of the world" grouping over 2017-19 is projected to be more modest than previously expected.
The adjustment of EME oil exporters to lower oil prices has been more protracted than anticipated, and the related fiscal consolidation is expected to exert a larger drag on growth.
Global financial conditions remain accommodative amid strengthening global growth, progress on US tax reforms and generally low inflation.
Yields on long-term sovereign bonds have edged up while equity markets have been strong, notably in the United States.
At the same time, monetary policy in some major jurisdictions has been putting upward pressure on short-term yields since October.
The Federal Reserve has continued to gradually normalize monetary policy, and markets expect several further increases in the federal funds rate in 2018 and beyond.
The Bank of England also raised its policy rate in November.
As a result of this combination of rising short-term rates and comparatively stable long-term yields, yield curves globally are somewhat flatter.
Benchmark prices for global crude oil have recently averaged about 20 per cent higher than assumed in October, driven mainly by supply-side factors.
Prices have been supported by political tensions in parts of the Middle East as well as pipeline outages, particularly in Libya and the North Sea.
With slowing growth in the productivity of newly drilled shale wells, diminished expectations for US shale oil production also likely supported prices.
In addition, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and some other oil producers extended the agreement to maintain their lower levels of production in November.
Meanwhile, the spread between the prices of West Texas Intermediate and Western Canada Select has widened sharply.
Transportation constraints faced by Canadian producers have held down the price of WCS, leaving it just below October levels, while the price of WTI has continued to climb.
Prices around these levels appear consistent with continued demand-supply adjustment in the global oil market.
Risks to global oil prices are tilted to the downside over 2018: US oil production has been increasing steadily, and a recent uptick in drilling activity for US shale oil suggests that production could be even stronger.
Meanwhile, if transportation issues are resolved, the price of WCS could move closer to that of WTI.
Despite recent volatility, base metal prices are back near October levels, with one exception in the sharp rise in iron ore spot prices.
Growth is expected to average about 2.5 per cent in the near term and then slow to close to potential growth.
Economic activity is being supported by still-accommodative monetary policy and financial conditions, as well as public infrastructure spending.
The contribution to growth from household spending is projected to decline, as recently robust employment gains and growth in household income are expected to slow.
Meanwhile, the combined contribution to growth from exports and business investment is expected to rise with foreign demand.
With these anticipated shifts in the composition of demand, the economy is expected to progress on a more sustainable basis.
The fundamentals supporting the profile for GDP growth have solidified since October.
Prospects for exports have improved in light of the stronger US outlook and higher commodity prices.
Further, a reassessment showing that domestic housing fundamentals are stronger has raised the profile for residential investment.
However, the uncertainty associated with the NAFTA renegotiations has increased, weighing further on the outlook for investment and exports.
The economy is estimated to have grown by 3.0 per cent in 2017.
Strong growth brought output close to potential and was accompanied by a significant reduction in labour market slack.
Growth is expected to slow to 2.2 per cent in 2018 and to 1.6 per cent in 2019.
CPI inflation picked up to 2.1 per cent in November, reflecting greater increases in the prices for gasoline and automobiles.
Inflation is anticipated to fluctuate in the near term as various positive and negative temporary factors namely those related to gasoline, electricity and food prices dissipate over different time frames.
Inflation is expected to remain close to 2 per cent over the projection horizon.
With the Canadian economy close to capacity, the Bank is evaluating whether strong demand is motivating firms to increase investment, entrepreneurs to create new firms, and people to enter the labour force or to increase their working hours.
In addition, the Bank is closely monitoring the dynamics of wages and inflation, including the implications of globalization and technology, to assess the interactions between capacity and inflationary pressures in the economy.
Revisions to historical data since October suggest that the level of business investment has been much higher since the start of 2014 than previously estimated.
This stronger profile implies a larger capital stock and more production capacity.
As a result, the estimated level of potential in the third quarter of 2017 was revised up by 0.2 per cent relative to the October Report.
Business investment increased production capacity in 2017.
This has been enhanced by public infrastructure spending.
In the first half of the year, business investment growth experienced a robust, broad-based rebound.
It remained solid in the third quarter, with another strong contribution from investment in machinery and equipment.
Further, the rate at which new firms are being created edged up in the third quarter, led by the goods-producing sector.
Increasing utilization should encourage ongoing solid investment growth, which would result in an expansion of capacity.
Data for the third quarter of 2017 show that capacity utilization rates were rising across most industries.
In addition, responses to the latest Business Outlook Survey indicate that capacity pressures picked up further in the fourth quarter and that excess capacity is now largely limited to oil and gas producing regions.
A jump in investment-related imports of machinery and equipment in the fourth quarter of 2017 and higher investment intentions in the BOS point to continuing strong investment.
Capacity pressures have also led firms to ramp up their hiring.
The national unemployment rate has fallen to a historically low level as a result of strong employment gains across industries and regions.
The average number of hours worked now appears to have recovered from its low in early 2017.
The Business Outlook Survey reports that labour shortages are more apparent and more intense than they were a year ago.
While wage growth has improved, underlying wage pressures remain modest.
The rapid pace of hiring and swift decline in the unemployment rate in the past few months indicate that labour market slack is being absorbed more quickly than expected.
However, several other factors are expected to constrain wage gains despite recent increases in minimum wages.
The elevated long-term unemployment rate and relatively low youth participation rate suggest an availability of additional labour resources over and above the natural expansion of the labour force.
The Bank's composite indicator of the labour market, which is designed to capture broad labour market developments, has fallen by less than the unemployment rate.
In addition, global competition, which is likely leading to more outsourcing and automation, might also be weighing on wage growth.
Core inflation measures have generally continued to move up since mid2017 and ranged from 1.5 to 1.9 per cent in November.
This gradual upward movement is consistent with declining economic slack and slowly building inflationary pressures.
After a strong performance in the first half of the year, economic growth moderated in the third quarter of 2017, as expected.
Consumption growth remained strong, and business investment grew at a solid, albeit slower, pace.
Exports declined sharply, however.
In the fourth quarter, GDP growth is estimated to have been stronger than potential, raising the estimated range of the output gap to -0.25 to +0.75 per cent.
The economy is expected to grow above potential, at an average of 2.5 per cent over the fourth quarter of 2017 and the first quarter of 2018.
Subsequently, quarterly growth is expected to moderate and average close to potential.
With this growth trajectory and the economy operating near capacity in the fourth quarter of 2017, the level of output is expected to track close to that of potential over the projection horizon.
Financial conditions overall have been broadly stable.
Even with recent interest rate increases, the stance of monetary policy in Canada remains accommodative and continues to support the level of economic activity.
Policy rate increases in July and September of 2017 contributed to higher short-term rates.
The rising short-term rates combined with comparatively stable long-term yields have resulted in a flatter Canadian yield curve, in line with developments in global markets.
Despite this flattening, the yield curve continues to have a moderate positive slope.
The Business Outlook Survey and Senior Loan Officer Survey report that, apart from higher prime rates, business-lending conditions either remained largely unchanged or eased slightly.
Consumption is expected to contribute meaningfully to growth in the near term, supported by ongoing strong job creation and elevated consumer confidence.
However, in 2018-19, consumption growth is anticipated to moderate and the savings rate to increase in response to slower growth of household disposable income and higher interest rates.
With higher interest rates, debt-service costs are expected to increase, thus dampening consumption growth, particularly of durable goods, which have been a significant driver of spending in recent quarters.
Elevated levels of household debt are likely to amplify the impact of higher interest rates on consumption, since increased debt-service costs are more likely to constrain some borrowers, forcing them to moderate their expenditures.
An increased sensitivity of consumption to interest rates has been incorporated in the Bank's projection model since October, but it is still too early to determine whether this behaviour is showing up in the data on consumer spending.
If this greater sensitivity fails to materialize, consumption could be stronger than anticipated.
Growth of household credit has slowed somewhat since the first half of 2017, even though some households may have pulled forward borrowing in anticipation of the new B-20 guidelines related to mortgage underwriting from the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions.
This slowing is consistent with higher borrowing costs due to the two policy rate increases in 2017.
The contribution of housing activity to growth is expected to turn positive in the fourth quarter of 2017, mainly as a result of a rebound in resale activity in Toronto.
Some of the strength in Toronto resales at the end of 2017 may reflect a desire to book transactions in advance of the effective date of the B-20 guidelines.
Residential investment is now expected to be roughly flat over the projection horizon.
The rate of new household formation is anticipated to support a solid level of housing activity, particularly in the Greater Toronto Area, where the supply of new housing units has not kept pace with demand.
However, interest rate increases, as well as macroprudential and other housing policy measures, are expected to weigh on growth in residential investment, since some prospective homebuyers may take on smaller mortgages or delay purchases.
Business investment is expected to continue to provide a moderate contribution to growth over the projection horizon, taking into account the mixed effects of recent developments.
Strength in spending on machinery and equipment is anticipated to continue in the near term before moderating somewhat, while the recovery of investment in non-residential structures is gradually gaining momentum.
Underlying fundamentals are strong and would support a more robust growth trajectory were it not for the effects of heightened uncertainty around trade policy and increased incentives to shift investment from Canada to the United States as a result of US tax reforms.
Elevated uncertainty around US trade policy is expected to continue to restrain growth in business investment.
Although their investment intentions indicate plans to boost spending, respondents to the Business Outlook Survey are increasingly concerned about the ongoing NAFTA renegotiations and rising protectionism more generally.
Greenfield foreign direct investment into Canada has declined since mid-2016, especially from Europe but also from the United States, a possible sign of the effects of the uncertainty around trade policy.
Trade-policy uncertainty is expected to reduce the level of investment by about 2 per cent by the end of 2019, an additional drag of 0.5 percentage points compared with the October projection.
The US tax reforms are anticipated to reinforce these uncertainty effects and dampen investment growth further.
Firms may decide to redirect some of their planned investment spending from Canada to the United States to benefit from the lower corporate taxes.
The projected expansion in overall business investment is taking place despite a pullback in the energy sector associated with the recent completion of several large oil sands and offshore projects.
Oil and gas investment is expected to be roughly flat over 2018 and 2019.
The profile has been revised down relative to the October Report based on new information from consultations with firms in the energy sector and the recent softening in oil and gas drilling activity.
Despite the rise in global oil prices, firms remain cautious about new investment projects, reflecting relatively weaker prices for WCS and Canadian natural gas, as well as uncertainty around pipeline capacity and the impact of other policy changes.
Despite the uncertainty around US trade policy, the projection for investment outside the energy sector has been revised up based on stronger expected demand.
Healthy fundamentals, including rising capacity pressures, widespread positive business sentiment and an increasing need to improve competitiveness through digital technologies, are expected to support investment.
Export growth has resumed and exports are expected to grow broadly in line with foreign demand.
The upward progression of exports was interrupted by a sharp decline in the third quarter of 2017, owing mainly to an anticipated adjustment in automobile production and the reversal of special factors that boosted growth earlier in the year.
Export growth resumed in the fourth quarter: non-commodity goods exports turned positive, driven by a rebound in exports of consumer goods and machinery and equipment.
Over the projection, exports of services and commodities are expected to remain solid.
Non-commodity goods exports outside the auto sector are expected to grow roughly in line with foreign demand.
However, past adjustments to vehicle production mandates will continue to exert a dampening effect on exports in the auto sector in 2018.
Positive revisions to economic growth in the United States, mainly in response to the effects of the tax reform legislation, are expected to boost the level of exports by about 1 per cent by the end of the projection horizon.
Yet, Canada's ability to benefit from an improving global outlook continues to be hindered by uncertainty around the status of trade arrangements.
This uncertainty is weighing negatively on investment in Canada and the rest of the world, and thus on the export outlook.
The spillover effects of trade policy uncertainty are estimated to be holding back exports by 0.7 per cent by the end of 2019, 0.3 percentage points more than had been anticipated in October.
Temporary factors, such as past electricity rebates, below-average food price inflation and exchange rate pass-through, have contributed to keep inflation below target in recent quarters.
Inflation is anticipated to continue to be close to 2 per cent.
The effects of various temporary factors are expected to dissipate over different time frames.
In particular, inflation will likely ease in January 2018, reflecting the transitory effects of elevated gasoline prices a year earlier.
Inflation is then expected to rise as the temporary effects of past fluctuations in consumer energy and food prices fade.
The drag from weak food inflation is expected to dissipate by the fourth quarter of 2018, three quarters later than previously expected, as recent developments and consultations suggest a more persistent effect from heightened competition among food retailers.
Compared with the October Report, higher prices for crude oil are expected to lift the inflation profile in 2018, but other sources of inflationary pressures remain broadly similar.
The projection for inflation also incorporates the estimated effects of recent and scheduled increases in provincial minimum wages.
The December 2017 Consensus Economics forecast for CPI inflation is 1.9 per cent in 2018.
Responses to a quarterly question on long-term inflation expectations show an average of 2.0 per cent through 2027.
The prospect of a notable shift toward protectionist global trade policies remains the most important risk surrounding the outlook.
While the Bank's base-case scenario incorporates the adverse effects of related elevated uncertainty on firms' investment and export activities, it is otherwise predicated on existing trade arrangements over the projection horizon.
The Bank's calculations suggest that about 50 per cent of US imports of goods from Canada received NAFTA preferential tariff rates in 2016, with significant variation across industries.
At this stage, it is difficult to predict the possible outcomes of trade negotiations and the timing, incidence and magnitude of their effects.
Assuming existing trade arrangements continue, the Bank assesses that the risks to the projected path for inflation are roughly balanced.
While the risks highlighted below are similar to those in the October Report, several risks were partially realized and the Bank's current base-case projection was adjusted accordingly.
As in past reports, the focus is on the most important risks for the inflation projection.
The Bank's base-case projection has been adjusted to incorporate negative spillover effects of greater uncertainty associated with NAFTA renegotiations.
Nevertheless, even with a cautious projection for exports, non-energy goods exports could disappoint, given ongoing competitiveness challenges.
As well, firms may respond to the expansion in foreign demand by investing outside of Canada rather than investing in and exporting from Canada.
While the base-case projection already includes some of the impact of strong demand on potential, labour productivity could be stronger than anticipated and could lead to faster growth of the economy's potential.
Thus, inflation could be weaker than projected.
The outlook for US economic growth has been revised up to reflect stronger momentum and the direct implications of the recently legislated US tax reforms.
However, growth could be even stronger if tax reform and deregulation were to trigger "animal spirits" in an environment of accommodative financial conditions, elevated equity prices and high corporate profits.
The resulting boost to investment, as well as stronger household spending, would have positive spillovers for Canadian investment and exports.
The outlook for consumption in 2018 has been revised up in the base-case projection, because recent data have suggested stronger underlying momentum.
It still remains the case that persistently elevated consumer confidence could lead to even stronger consumer spending, with a savings rate that remains close to or falls below its recent relatively low level rather than gradually rising.
The vulnerabilities associated with household indebtedness would be exacerbated if the additional spending were financed by additional borrowing.
Imbalances in the Canadian housing market remain, particularly in the greater Toronto and Vancouver areas.
Based on historical experience, direct spillovers to the rest of the country would be modest.
Global economic growth is solid and broad-based, but the outlook is subject to considerable risk from escalating trade tensions.
The expansion has been underpinned by an upswing in world trade and business investment.
Global growth is expected to ease from around 3 3/4 per cent in 2018 to about 3 1/2 per cent in 2020.
This projection incorporates a higher estimated level of potential output for some major advanced economies, partly reflecting greater labour force participation.
The additional estimated capacity is likely a contributing factor to subdued inflation in 2017.
More recently, core inflation has firmed.
Financial conditions remain supportive of growth, and market volatility, triggered in part by geopolitical and trade-policy concerns, has risen from extraordinarily low levels.
Trade policy is an increasingly prominent risk to the global economic expansion.
US tariff announcements and proposed retaliatory actions by China raise the risk of a more pronounced shift away from a multilateral, rules-based system.
A wide range of outcomes are still possible for the renegotiation of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Even without changes in trade arrangements, increased concerns about trade policies could lead to a sharper-than-expected tightening of financial conditions, lower confidence and a more pronounced slowing of growth.
The Bank's base-case scenario, while predicated on the assumption that existing agreements will remain in place, continues to incorporate adverse effects from uncertainty on global investment and NAFTA-related judgment specific to Canada and Mexico.
By convention, the direct impacts of tariffs announced by the United States and China will be added to the Bank's forecast if, and when, they are implemented.
The US economy has been expanding at a solid pace, with private domestic demand rebounding at the end of 2017.
Softness in consumption in the first quarter of 2018 is expected to be transitory.
The labour market has been strong: more than 200,000 new jobs were created per month, on average, over the past six months.
Rising prime-age labour force participation in recent years has also contributed to a higher estimate of potential output.
Tax reform and deregulation may have increased incentives to shift investment to the United States from other jurisdictions.
Sizable fiscal stimulus should lift growth over the course of the next three years.
New legislation since the January Report authorizes more than US$300 billion in extra federal expenditures.
The combined budgetary impact of the planned spending increase and recent tax reforms is expected to amount to roughly US$1 trillion over the projection horizon, which should provide a material boost to growth.
Since the US economy is already operating at around potential, the new spending is expected to add some additional upward pressure on inflation and bond yields.
The US economy is now forecast to grow on average at about 2 3/4 per cent over 2018-19, well above the rate of potential growth.
Consumption is expected to rise at a healthy pace, underpinned by a strong labour market and fiscal stimulus.
Business investment should be supported by a solid expansion of private demand, as well as by tax changes.
Gross domestic product growth is projected to ease to around 2 per cent in 2020, close to US potential growth, as support from fiscal and monetary policy diminishes.
The euro area saw broad-based growth of about 2 3/4 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2017, and recent developments indicate that the economy will likely continue to grow above potential.
The pace of growth is anticipated to slow from 2 1/4 per cent to 1 1/2 per cent by 2020 as capacity constraints intensify and monetary policy stimulus is gradually withdrawn.
This profile is somewhat stronger than in January, reflecting upward revisions to potential growth and more solid domestic demand.
In Japan, an improved global backdrop and high consumer confidence have supported a healthy expansion in business investment and consumption.
GDP growth is projected to be around 1 1/2 per cent in 2018, and to moderate significantly by 2020 in the wake of a planned 2019 hike in the value-added tax.
The Chinese economy grew by close to 7 per cent in 2017, stronger than anticipated in the January Report, with some extra momentum spilling into 2018.
Growth is still expected to decline from around 6 1/2 per cent in 2018 to near 6 per cent in 2020, as part of the continued transition to more sustainable growth.
Financial sector measures adopted since the start of 2017 have constrained the expansion of shadow banking and contributed to a softening of credit growth.
Nevertheless, financial vulnerabilities remain elevated.
The ongoing expansion in other oil-importing emerging-market economies is anticipated to continue to support global growth.
Exchange rate depreciation in some countries and strong external demand suggest a brighter outlook for exports than in January, leading to a somewhat faster pace of expansion of around 4 1/4 per cent over the projection.
In oil-exporting countries, the effects of ongoing fiscal consolidation and past oil price declines are expected to continue to dissipate, leading to a pickup in growth.
US core inflation has continued to firm, as anticipated.
Core inflation is expected to rise further in the coming quarters as the economy experiences more excess demand and the transitory effect of the past decline in telecommunication prices passes.
US wage growth has been moderate by most measures but is expected to pick up with a tightening labour market.
Core inflation in the euro area and Japan has increased since the end of 2017.
Inflation in these regions is nonetheless still soft and is anticipated to rise only gradually toward central bank targets over the projection horizon.
US government bond yields have risen since January, reflecting actual and expected changes in monetary policy.
Monetary policy normalization is occurring from different starting points and at different speeds, with the United States further along than other advanced economies.
In many advanced economies where policy interest rates were constrained by their effective lower bounds, central banks have relied on unconventional tools, including quantitative easing and forward guidance.
As these policy interventions are unwound, the dampening effects of monetary policy on volatility are diminishing.
Financial conditions are still supportive of economic activity, even with recent yield increases and equity price declines.
Despite the more robust US outlook, and expectations of additional monetary tightening, the US dollar is around 5 per cent lower on a trade-weighted basis than it was a year ago.
Term premiums and risk premiums remain low by historical standards.
Faster-than-expected increases in interest rates, potentially triggered by inflation concerns, could lead to financial market turbulence globally.
In some EMEs, the February rise in financial market volatility caused a brief increase in portfolio outflows, highlighting the vulnerability of these countries to sharper increases in yields.
The recent averages of global oil prices are largely in line with those assumed in the January Report.
Higher global oil demand and lower production by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries have led to inventory declines, reducing the downside risk to prices.
US shale rig counts have continued to rise, and US oil production has increased by more than one million barrels per day since April 2017.
The largely offsetting strength in both demand growth and US shale output growth suggests that risks to oil prices are roughly balanced.
By convention, the Bank assumes that oil prices will stay near their recent levels throughout the projection horizon.
While the spread between West Texas Intermediate and Western Canada Select has narrowed recently, it remains wide due to transportation constraints.
Natural gas prices, meanwhile, have dropped sharply due to weather-related demand fluctuations in North America and longer-term increases in supply.
After steadily rising over the second half of 2017, the Bank's non-energy commodity price index has been relatively stable since January.
Robust US housing starts and rail bottlenecks have led to stronger lumber prices.
Newly announced tariffs by the United States and China have weighed on prices for iron ore and some agricultural commodities, such as hogs.
Looking ahead, the BCNE is expected to remain near its current level.
Canada's economic growth has moderated, and the economy is operating close to capacity.
While a moderation was anticipated, temporary factors notably, volatility in trade shipments, amplified by transport bottlenecks, and the dynamic response of housing markets to regulatory changesare resulting in sizable short-term fluctuations in growth.
Looking through these fluctuations, economic growth is projected to average slightly above that of potential output over the next three years.
Real GDP growth is now projected to be about 2 per cent in both 2018 and 2019 and to ease to 1.8 per cent in 2020, the estimated growth rate of potential.
This profile reflects a slight downward revision in 2018 and a more notable upward revision in 2019 relative to the January projection.
The higher profile for economic activity incorporates additional fiscal stimulus and upward revisions to the estimated profiles of potential output and national income.
Over the projection horizon, the composition of growth is expected to shift, with a declining contribution from household spending and a rising relative contribution from business investment and exports.
Higher interest rates are anticipated to contribute to this adjustment.
Monetary and fiscal policy are expected to support economic activity over the projection horizon and to help mitigate the drag on business investment and exports associated with trade-policy uncertainty and competitiveness challenges.
Inflation is close to target.
Both consumer price index inflation and the Bank's preferred measures of core inflation have recently increased to around 2 per cent.
The temporary factors putting upward pressure on inflation, namely gasoline prices and minimum wage increases, more than offset the diminishing drag from electricity and food prices.
Since these upward pressures are expected to persist longer than the downward pressures, CPI inflation is forecast to be modestly higher in 2018 than anticipated in January but to still return to about the 2 per cent target thereafter.
While real GDP is expected to grow at around 2 per cent, on average, in the first half of 2018, the Bank anticipates a swing in quarter-over-quarter growth rates.
Accounting for these factors, economic activity is estimated to have expanded by 1.3 per cent in the first quarter and is forecast to rebound and grow by 2.5 per cent in the second quarter.
Exports declined in the first quarter, in part reflecting transportation issues that interrupted the shipment of some commodities.
These disruptions are anticipated to be temporary, and export growth is expected to rebound in the second quarter, led by a large increase in exports of crude oil as production growth continues.
Non-energy commodity exports, such as lumber and agricultural products, will begin growing again as the backlog of shipments caused by poor weather and capacity issues in rail transportation are addressed.
Housing activity is estimated to have contracted sharply in the first quarter, following the implementation of the revised B-20 Guideline.
The contraction was amplified as some homebuyers acted quickly in the fourth quarter of 2017 to purchase a home before being subject to the new measure.
Investment growth likely paused in the first quarter, due mainly to the completion of some major energy projects late in 2017.
The contraction of energy investment should offset the ongoing expansion of investment in other sectors.
Recent import data continue to signal robust growth of investment in machinery and equipment.
Compared with the January projection, economic growth was weaker in the fourth quarter of 2017, mainly because of stronger-than-expected imports of machinery and equipment.
While real GDP expanded at close to potential growth, the contribution of domestic demand was strong.
The estimate for economic growth in the first quarter of 2018 is also revised down, largely reflecting the shifting of activity across quarters.
With this Report, the Bank provides its annual reassessment of the ranges of potential output growth.
Potential output growth is expected to be stronger than estimated in April 2017, at 1.8 per cent between 2018 and 2020, and 1.9 per cent in 2021.
Growth of trend labour productivity is expected to improve, owing to stronger business investment.
Trend labour input growth will continue to slow, due to population aging, with immigration providing only a partial offset.
The Bank's assessment of potential output is subject to considerable uncertainty, and thus the estimates are presented as a range.
With positive revisions to potential output and a lower-than-expected level of GDP, the Bank judges that the output gap in the first quarter of 2018 was between -0.75 and +0.25 per cent.
While this range is somewhat lower than assessed in January, it still implies that the Canadian economy has been operating close to capacity for three consecutive quarters.
Although firms added to the economy's potential in recent quarters by increasingly investing in machinery, equipment and structures and expanding employment, some continue to face significant production constraints.
This reflects an upward revision to trend labour input due to strong employment gains in 2017.
The overall industrial rate of capacity utilization is now close to its historical peak, with several sectors at or near their post-2003 highs.
In addition, the spring Business Outlook Survey indicated that capacity pressures have moderated but are still close to recent highs, particularly outside the oil- and gas-producing regions.
The labour market continues to improve across sectors and regions, although the growth of employment and hours worked has slowed since the beginning of 2018.
The unemployment rate remains near its 40-year low.
Job vacancies have risen by nearly 25 per cent over the past year and were at 470,000 in the fourth quarter of 2017, considerably higher than the typical annual expansion of employment.
Strong hiring intentions and more difficulties recruiting, as reported in the most recent BOS, also point to tightening labour markets and shrinking labour market slack.
However, there are remaining elements of unemployment and underemployment: the long-term unemployment rate is still relatively high, the youth participation rate has room to increase, and BOS respondents in the oil- and gas-producing regions continue to point to remaining labour market slack.
The overall improvement in the labour market has been contributing to rising wages.
Firms surveyed in the spring BOS report signs of increasing wage pressures, due to competition for labour and, to a lesser extent, minimum wage increases.
Wage growth is somewhat below what would be expected were the economy operating with no excess labour.
Measures of CPI inflation and core inflation are around 2 per cent, consistent with the economy operating close to capacity.
Since its trough in the middle of 2017, CPI inflation has firmed, as expected, with the absorption of excess capacity and the dissipation of some temporary factors.
CPI inflation in the first quarter was higher than anticipated at the time of the January Report.
The positive surprise was associated with the prices for air transportation and semi-durables, and for some services that were affected by the higher minimum wage in some provinces.
The impact of these price shocks on inflation is expected to be temporary.
Meanwhile, recent monthly fluctuations in CPI inflation have mostly reflected transitory movements in gasoline prices.
The Bank's three preferred measures of core inflation moved up, as expected, reflecting diminished downward pressure from excess capacity.
The pickup in CPI-common since the beginning of 2018 reflects in part the impact of the recent minimum wage increases.
The Bank projects that the economy will expand slightly faster than potential output over 2018 and 2019, and then grow with potential.
The composition of growth is expected to gradually shift, with the contribution of investment and exports increasing, while that of household spending declines.
The economic outlook has been revised up since January to reflect the positive implications of stronger potential output growth and recently tabled federal and provincial budgets.
The Bank estimates that the measures contained in the new provincial budgets, if enacted, will add about 0.4 per cent to the level of real GDP by the end of 2020.
The macroeconomic impact of the new federal budget on GDP over the projection horizon is expected to be similar to that in the January Report, which was based on the Fall Economic Statement 2017.
Higher interest rates and slowing growth in disposable income are expected to gradually dampen household spending growth over the projection horizon.
The pace of expansion of household credit has slowed since last summer, indicating that higher interest rates and measures affecting the housing market are beginning to have an impact on borrowing behaviour.
The projection continues to incorporate a greater sensitivity of household spending to interest rate increases when debt levels are elevated; this sensitivity will be reassessed over time with incoming data.
In 2018, consumption is expected to continue to contribute significantly to growth, supported by elevated consumer confidence and ongoing employment and wage increases.
The contribution of residential investment is expected to decline.
However, this is expected to be offset by the softness of resales, which should recover only gradually from the contraction at the beginning of the year.
In 2019 and 2020, consumption and residential investment growth are both expected to moderate.
Although the rate of household formation is anticipated to remain robust, housing activity is expected to gradually decline due to the higher interest rates and the longer-run impact of the housing measures.
At the same time, consumption and income growth are projected to slow in tandem, and the savings rate is therefore anticipated to remain largely stable.
Although restrained by trade-policy uncertainty and ongoing competitiveness challenges, business investment is expected to continue its recovery.
This expansion should be supported by ongoing increases in foreign and domestic demand, rising capacity pressures and positive business sentiment.
Growth of investment spending is expected to be particularly robust for firms in the service and information technology sectors.
Despite strengthening global demand, growth of business investment in export-oriented goods industries is anticipated to be restrained by elevated uncertainty around trade policy, regulatory concerns and incentives to shift investment to the United States following the US tax reform.
In the spring BOS, some businesses confirmed that these factors are affecting their investment decisions.
In the energy sector, which accounts for roughly 20 per cent of business investment in Canada, the Bank forecasts that investment will decrease in 2018 and remain roughly flat thereafter.
Roughly half of Canadian oil production is considered heavy, with WCS prices serving as the appropriate benchmark.
Transportation bottlenecks led to a widening of the WTI-WCS spread.
Only a part of heavy oil production is subject to the full discount in WCS prices, however, since some oil producers have integrated refinery operations and dedicated shipping capacity.
Nevertheless, relatively low prices for WCS and limited pipeline and rail capacity out of Western Canada could discourage longer-term investment in the oil sands.
Non-commodity exports are projected to grow at about the rate of foreign demand, although they are not expected to recover the ground lost relative to global activity and the associated rise in global trade volumes over the past several quarters.
The steady downtrend in Canada's share of US non-energy goods imports has not slowed despite the depreciation of the Canadian dollar in recent years and is indicative of the ongoing competitiveness challenges that some Canadian exporters face.
While a substantial part of this trend may be explained by the growing importance of China in global trade, factors specific to Canada have also played a role.
Lower vehicle production mandates, which led to a sizable contraction in the auto sector, are expected to continue to limit auto sector exports.
In addition, for some other industries, capacity constraints will restrain exports.
Exporters participating in the Bank's spring BOS reported capacity constraints and labour shortages, as well as negative effects of protectionism on their sales prospects.
While the level of non-commodity exports has been held back, looking ahead, they are expected to expand, boosted by the ongoing strength in foreign demand.
Service exports that are expected to benefit include transportation; tourism; and telecommunications, computer and information services.
In addition, ongoing technological change, especially in the digital economy, is expected to continue to drive strong growth of related service exports.
With their anticipated robust pace of growth, service exports should increase as a share of Canadian exports.
Commodities exports are anticipated to expand at a solid pace given the projected expansions of both production and demand, although this growth is expected to be constrained by ongoing transportation challenges.
CPI inflation is anticipated to remain modestly above 2 per cent until the end of 2018.
Temporary factors, namely elevated gasoline prices and the impact of minimum wage increases, are expected to more than offset the fading effects of electricity price rebates and low food price inflation.
In 2019, inflation is expected to return to about 2 per cent.
To date, their impact on Canadian inflation does not appear to be significant.
Relative to January, the projection for CPI inflation in 2018 is revised up by 0.3 percentage points, due to higher-than-expected prices for intercity transport and semi-durable goods and stronger-than-expected effects of the minimum wage increases.
The effects of these factors are expected to dissipate by early 2019.
This projection is consistent with medium- and long-term inflation expectations remaining well anchored.
Most respondents to the BOS anticipate that inflation will remain between 1 and 3 per cent over the next two years.
A little more than half of them now expect inflation to be in the upper half of that range, owing to tighter labour markets, higher commodity prices and minimum wage increases.
The March 2018 Consensus Economics forecast for CPI inflation is 2.1 per cent in 2018 and 2.0 per cent in 2019.
The prospect of a notable shift toward protectionist global trade policies remains the most important risk affecting the outlook.
While the Bank's base-case scenario incorporates the adverse effects of the associated higher uncertainty on firms' investment and export activities, it otherwise assumes that existing trade arrangements will be maintained over the projection horizon.
With the gradual evolution of economic conditions in Canada and abroad, the Bank has chosen to highlight an additional risk.
Even with a cautious projection for exports, non-energy goods exports could disappoint, given ongoing competitiveness challenges and limited capacity.
Firms may respond to the expansion in foreign demand by investing outside Canada rather than investing in and exporting from Canada.
Such a reallocation would have various negative effects on the Canadian economy, including lower production capacity and lower domestic demand due to reduced employment in the export sector.
Financial conditions remain broadly accommodative, but could tighten suddenly.
Heightened trade tensions, a repricing of the future path of monetary policy, or a faster pickup in wage and price inflation could trigger such a tightening.
Tighter financial conditions could manifest as a rise in bond yields and potentially disruptive portfolio adjustments.
The outlook for US economic growth has been revised up to reflect new government spending.
However, growth could be even stronger if tax reform and deregulation in the United States trigger "animal spirits" in an environment of accommodative financial conditions, elevated equity prices and high corporate profits.
The resulting boost to investment, as well as stronger household spending, would have positive implications for Canadian investment and exports.
Elevated consumer confidence could lead to stronger consumer spending than in the base-case projection.
While there appears to be some moderation in prices and less speculative demand, a sizable decline in house prices in some markets could still be possible.
A drop in house prices would likely dampen residential investment and consumption.
Global economic growth remains solid, with the US economy showing particular strength.
The Bank estimates that growth in US real gross domestic product in the first half of 2018 was even stronger than expected in the April Monetary Policy Report.
In other advanced economies, economic growth is projected to pick up following temporary softness in the first quarter, but with less momentum than anticipated in April.
Higher oil prices are expected to have a slightly negative net effect on global growth, with the impact varying across regions.
The Bank expects the global economy will grow by about 3 3/4 per cent in 2018 before settling at around 3 1/2 per cent in 2019, similar to the April projection.
Escalating trade tensions pose considerable risks to the outlook.
The projection incorporates actions taken since April by the United States to end exemptions on steel and aluminum tariffs for some of its largest trading partners and to implement previously announced tariffs on China.
It also accounts for the ensuing countermeasures.
More broadly, this escalation has heightened concerns about a more pronounced shift away from a multilateral, rules-based trading system.
These concerns could dampen the outlook for global trade and investment growth.
In response to these developments, the Bank's base case now includes the measures that have already been implemented.
It also considers somewhat greater adverse effects from uncertainty on investment, both globally and in North America.
The actions and uncertainty effects are assumed to reduce the level of global GDP by 0.2 per cent by the end of 2020.
Bond yields remain higher than in 2017 in some regions, reflecting actual and expected changes in monetary policy.
Monetary policy normalization is occurring from different starting points and at different speeds.
The European Central Bank has announced the conditional conclusion of its asset purchase program (quantitative easing) by the end of December 2018.
The economic expansion in the United States is further along than it is in other advanced economies and is receiving a sizable boost from fiscal policy.
The US Federal Reserve has continued to withdraw monetary stimulus, and markets are now expecting a faster pace of increases in the federal funds rate.
Positive market sentiment about the near-term US outlook has also contributed to an appreciation of the US dollar and portfolio outflows from emerging-market economies , exacerbating country specific vulnerabilities.
Equity prices have become more sensitive to trade policy developments.
Overall, despite recent movements, global financial conditions are supportive of economic activity.
The US economy has been expanding at a solid pace, with recent data signalling more momentum than anticipated in the April Report.
Net exports have been unexpectedly robust, reflecting transitory factors, and business investment has been more solid than expected.
Job gains continue to be elevated amid a tight labour market, and indicators of consumer sentiment remain high.
The US economy is forecast to expand by 3 per cent in 2018 and 2 1/2 per cent in 2019, well above the estimated rate of its potential output growth.
Consumption is anticipated to rise at a healthy pace, underpinned by strong employment growth, past income tax cuts and elevated household net worth.
Solid private demand and corporate tax cuts should drive robust business investment growth.
GDP growth is projected to ease to around 2 per cent in 2020, close to potential output growth, as fiscal and monetary policy support diminishes.
US businesses are starting to report that trade policy uncertainty is dampening an otherwise upbeat outlook for investment, although this is not yet evident in the data.
The current base-case projection for the US economy therefore incorporates some modest adverse effects of trade policy uncertainty on investment.
US core inflation has firmed as the effects of transitory factors, including past declines in telecommunication prices, have passed.
Wage growth has been modest but is expected to pick up with a tightening labour market.
With stronger wage growth and support from excess demand, core inflation is forecast to remain close to the Federal Reserve's inflation target of 2 per cent.
Growth in the euro area softened at the start of the year, partly reflecting labour strikes and some weakness in exports.
Recent indicators have been mixed, but solid fundamentals will likely support a rebound in the second quarter.
Growth is expected to slow from 2 1/4 per cent in 2018 to about 1 1/2 per cent in 2019 and 2020, close to the rate of potential output growth, as monetary policy becomes less accommodative.
Inflation in the euro area remains tepid and is anticipated to rise only gradually.
Political developments have renewed market concerns over fiscal sustainability in the euro area, at the same time that uncertainty from trade policy has increased.
Overall the growth outlook for EMEs remains strong.
EMEs have generally become more resilient to stress over the past several years.
However, both Argentina and Turkey have come under acute financial stress since April.
These developments appear to be related to elevated debt levels and weaknesses in their monetary policy frameworks.
Growth in oil-importing EMEs is forecast to be around 4 1/4 per cent over the projection.
Growth in oil exporting EMEs is expected to rise as they benefit from higher oil prices.
China's GDP growth in the first quarter of this year was slower than expected in April, largely reflecting a temporary surge in import growth.
This surge was due, in part, to stock building.
While imports have remained strong, recent indicators point to a solid rebound in GDP growth.
Authorities have eased monetary policy to help offset downside risks from a slowdown in the pace of credit growth and from trade policy developments that could weigh on investor sentiment.
Economic growth is still anticipated to moderate from around 6 1/2 per cent in 2018 to around 6 per cent in 2020, as part of the continued transition to more sustainable growth.
Crude oil prices have been averaging about 15 per cent higher than assumed in the April Report.
The increase in prices was partly driven by unplanned output declines in Venezuela and sanctions on exports from Iran, in a market where demand growth has been healthy and excess inventories are being drawn down.
US shale drilling has also expanded by less than anticipated, reflecting higher costs and pipeline bottlenecks.
Risks to global oil prices are roughly balanced at current price levels.
An important upside risk is that there could be further disruptions in oil supply from Iran and Venezuela.
In contrast, production by members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries could increase faster than expected as the previous agreement to reduce output expires.
The possibility that US shale productivity growth could be stronger than expected provides another downside risk to prices.
The spreads between West Texas Intermediate and Western Canada Select and between Brent and WTI have narrowed recently due to temporary factors.
These spreads are expected to widen again because of transportation bottlenecks.
The Bank's convention is to assume that oil prices stay at their recent average levels over the projection horizon.
The Bank's non-energy commodity price index is relatively unchanged since April.
The prices received by Canadian lumber producers remain high, despite the duties imposed by the United States last year, partly as a result of brisk US home building.
Base metal prices have recently declined as a result of the escalation in global trade tensions and market concerns over risks to GDP growth in China.
Many commodity-exporting economies, including Canada, have recently seen their currencies depreciate despite the rise in oil prices.
The typical exchange rate appreciation associated with improving terms of trade is being offset by the combined effects of the broad-based appreciation of the US dollar and of rising trade tensions.
Trade developments are important for these countries, given their considerable reliance on open trade and global economic growth.
In this context, the Canadian dollar is assumed to remain close to its recent average of 76 cents US, compared with 78 cents US in April.
The Canadian economy continues to operate close to full capacity, and GDP is expected to expand somewhat faster than potential.
The composition of growth is shifting: the contribution from household spending is expected to be smaller than in 2017 while that from exports and business investment is anticipated to be larger.
In the Bank's projection, economic activity will be supported by continuing solid foreign demand and accommodative financial conditions.
While investment and trade are projected to expand, they are being restrained by the US tariffs recently imposed on Canadian steel and aluminum imports and by uncertainty around trade policies.
Since April, uncertainty has increased, reflecting delays in the progress of renegotiations of the North American Free Trade Agreement, as well as the broadening and unknown duration of tariffs.
Real GDP growth is projected to average 2.0 per cent over 2018 to 2020, similar to the outlook in the April Report.
In the first quarter of 2018, business investment and exports were more robust than anticipated.
Stronger levels of spending are expected to persist over the projection horizon, partly reflecting higher oil prices, even with the larger impacts from both trade policy uncertainty and tariffs.
Consumer price index inflation has hovered around 2.2 per cent recently.
It is expected to reach 2.5 per cent in the third and fourth quarters before returning to close to 2 per cent in the second half of 2019 as the effects of temporary factors fade.
Given the importance of temporary factors, it is useful to look at the Bank's measures of core inflation.
These measures remain near 2 per cent, consistent with an economy operating close to capacity.
The economy is expected to grow somewhat above its potential in the near term.
As anticipated, growth was a modest 1.3 per cent in the first quarter and is expected to average about 2 per cent over the second and third quarters.
The composition of growth has begun to shift away from household spending toward business investment and exports.
This shift is occurring as households adjust to higher interest rates and tighter mortgage rules (Guideline B-20).
Growth of household credit has continued to slow and is now below the growth rate of household income; as a result, the ratio of household debt to disposable income is edging down.
Consumption growth has been slowing since the middle of 2017, led by a pullback in spending on components sensitive to interest rates.
While Guideline B-20 is improving the credit quality of new mortgages, its announcement and adoption led to a pull forward of housing resales into the fourth quarter of 2017, followed by a sharp drop in the first few months of 2018.
As a result, residential investment in the first half of 2018 likely contracted.
A partial rebound in resales is expected in the third quarter.
Meanwhile, firms are expanding their capacity in the face of solid demand.
The Bank estimates that business investment and exports were stronger in the first half of 2018 than anticipated in the April Report.
Spending on computer equipment, software, and research and development was particularly robust.
Because the strength of export growth in the first two quarters mainly reflected a faster-than-expected rebound in oil exports after temporary pipeline shutdowns in late 2017, export growth in the third quarter is expected to slow.
The Bank judges that the output gap in the second quarter of 2018 was between -0.5 and +0.5 per cent.
The Bank has revised its estimates of potential output up modestly since April to reflect a higher level of investment from the first quarter of 2018 through the projection horizon.
Investment could grow faster than anticipated in the base-case projection, further raising potential output.
Labour market conditions remain healthy, but growth of employment and average hours worked has slowed from last year's strong pace.
Likewise, after declining notably in 2017, the unemployment rate to date this year has remained relatively steady, near its 40-year low.
Firms reported in the summer Business Outlook Survey that capacity pressures and labour shortages have intensified.
Nevertheless, there are areas where labour market slack remainsespecially in the energy-producing regions.
The recent uptick in the labour force participation rate indicates that additional people may be willing to work.
As well, the long-term unemployment rate is still relatively high, and the participation rate in the youth labour market remains subdued.
Against this backdrop, underlying wage growth remains close to 2.3 per cent, indicating less wage pressure than would be expected in a labour market with no slack.
Consistent with an economy operating near potential, core inflation measures remain close to 2 per cent.
CPI inflation is slightly above 2 per cent, mainly reflecting temporary upward pressures from increases in gasoline prices and in the prices of services affected by recent rises in minimum wages.
The Bank expects that GDP will grow somewhat faster than potential output over the projection horizon.
Consumption should be supported by solid gains in real gross domestic income.
The combined contribution to growth of exports and investment will continue to be better than in recent years, even after incorporating the restraining effects of the US tariffs and the Canadian countermeasures.
Growth of government spending is projected to slow in 2019 and 2020 relative to the previous two years as the effects of the 2016 federal budget stimulus gradually dissipate.
Following the Bank's recent practice, the base-case projection incorporates the impact of trade policy uncertainty, as well as the effects of implemented tariffs.
These tariffs include previously imposed US tariffs on Canadian softwood lumber and newsprint, the new US tariffs on steel and aluminum imports from Canada, and Canadian countermeasures.
The dampening effects associated with trade policy uncertainty and the implemented US tariffs subtract about 2/3 per cent from the level of GDP by the end of 2020.
While this drag is larger than in the April Report, the incremental drag on projected GDP roughly balances the positive impact of higher oil prices.
Consumer spending is expected to provide less support to GDP growth than in 2017.
The contribution of residential investment is expected to be small in 2018 and to subsequently decline.
The decline is driven by tighter mortgage rules and higher interest rates.
The sensitivity of consumption and housing to interest rates is estimated to be larger than in past cycles, given the elevated ratio of household debt to disposable income.
The impact of higher interest rates likely differs across categories of borrowers, with highly indebted households the most affected.
Consumption growth is expected to be supported by a pickup in wage growth and an improvement in Canada's terms of trade resulting from higher oil prices.
However, growth in consumer spending is anticipated to be tempered by a modest slowdown in the growth of total hours worked and by the revisions to mortgage rules.
The revised rules may prompt some households to save more so that they can pass the tighter mortgage stress tests.
Residential investment is slowing, reflecting the effects of higher interest rates and tighter mortgage rules.
Resale activity contracted when the revised measures went into effect but is anticipated to improve over the next few quarters.
Data on resale activity and housing starts suggest that the housing market is beginning to stabilize.
Growth of new construction spending is expected to slow over the projection horizon.
The new mortgage measures may cause households to purchase less-expensive residences because typical homebuyers are now more constrained in how much they can borrow.
Business investment is expected to expand at a modest pace following the strong growth observed since the beginning of 2017.
Firms in all regions expect capacity pressures to intensify.
However, exporting firms and their domestic suppliers are anticipated to delay or reduce investment spending because of increasing trade policy uncertainty.
In many sectors, moderate investment growth is expected as firms anticipating solid growth in domestic and foreign demand and capacity pressures increase their capital expenditures.
Capacity utilization rates have been rising and are near post-2003 highs in many industries.
In the mining, oil and gas sector, higher prices should provide an incentive to increase investment.
Sentiment has been improving with the higher oil prices and indications of progress toward addressing shortages of pipeline capacity.
However, with transportation constraints persisting for oil in Western Canada, spending to expand production is expected to be restrained in the near term.
Export growth is expected to increase over the projection horizon, supported mainly by solid foreign demand growth and higher oil prices.
The outlook would have been stronger
were it not for the recently imposed tariffs and increased uncertainty associated with global trade policies.
Growth prospects differ across sectors, in part because of the varying intensity of capacity constraints faced by firms.
Tariffs imposed by the US administration on imports of steel and aluminum from Canada are expected to subtract about 0.6 per cent from Canadian exports.
Likewise, tariffs imposed by Canada on certain products imported from the United States are expected to subtract 0.6 per cent from Canadian imports.
Buoyed by strong foreign demand, sectors that are planning to increase capital expenditures to expand capacity or innovate, such as machinery manufacturing and services, are expected to boost their exports.
Some sectors will likely continue to face capacity constraints.
Exports of many commodities, for example, are currently limited by transportation bottlenecks due to rail car shortages.
These shortages are expected to abate over the coming year.
Food manufacturing is also struggling with physical capacity issues, while difficulties recruiting skilled labour are more frequently reported by firms specializing in information and technology, industrial machinery, equipment and parts, and research and development.
The Bank continues to assume that competitiveness challenges will restrain export growth over the forecast horizon.
This follows losses of competitiveness in recent years that were experienced in all categories of non-energy exports.
Growth of imports is expected to slow over the projection horizon, consistent with the moderation in the growth rate of final domestic demand and the tariffs imposed by Canada on certain US products.
CPI inflation is projected to rise temporarily, reaching 2.5 per cent in the third and fourth quarters of 2018 before returning to about 2 per cent.
Inflation is expected to be higher than 2 per cent owing to higher gasoline prices in recent months, the impact of minimum wage increases, newly imposed tariffs and exchange rate pass-through.
The Bank estimates that tariffs levied by Canada on some products imported from the United States will temporarily boost inflation by about 0.1 percentage point.
Once prices have fully adjusted to incorporate the effects of these factors, the associated upward pressures on inflation will fade.
Low food price inflation is expected to have a negative effect on CPI inflation until the first half of 2019.
CPI inflation is expected to be close to 2 per cent from mid-2019 through the end of the projection horizon.
The base-case projection provides the Bank's view of the most likely outcome for inflation.
Any projection is subject to considerable forecast uncertainty.
A 90 per cent confidence band around the inflation projection widens from 0.6 percentage points in the third quarter of 2018 to 1.5 percentage points by the end of 2020.
The projection is consistent with medium- and long-term inflation expectations remaining well anchored.
Most respondents to the summer Business Outlook Survey anticipate that inflation will remain within the Bank's target range of 1 to 3 per cent over the next two years.
The majority expect inflation to be in the upper half of that range, consistent with the Bank's projection.
The June 2018 Consensus Economics forecast for CPI inflation is 2.3 per cent in 2018 and 2.0 per cent in 2019, with long-term annual inflation expectations averaging 2.0 per cent through 2028.
The ongoing shift toward protectionist global trade policies remains the most important source of uncertainty surrounding the outlook.
Related risks have broadened and intensified, although some aspects of these risks have been partially realized with the imposition of tariffs by the US administration and countermeasures by other countries.
With respect to bilateral trade arrangements between the United States and Canada, the base-case projection incorporates the effects of the US tariffs on steel and aluminum imports from Canada and Canadian countermeasures.
It also incorporates the effects of previously imposed US tariffs on Canadian softwood lumber and newsprint and those of trade policy uncertainty.
It is impossible to fully quantify the possible outcomes associated with changing trade policies without clarity about the actual measures and their timing.
In this context, the Bank assesses that the risks to the projected path for inflation are roughly balanced.
As in past reports, the focus is on a selection of risks identified as the most important for the projected path for inflation, drawing from a larger set of risks accounted for in the projection.
The evolution of risks since April is summarized in Table 5.
The risk of weaker Canadian exports and investment has intensified since April.
A broadening of US tariffs could pose a significant risk to Canadian economic activity.
While the primary channel for such trade policy actions would be through reduced exports and imports, additional channels of transmission could be important.
For industries that comprise a relatively large share of Canadian exports and with highly integrated cross-border supply chains, such as the auto sector, tariffs would have large impacts on investment and employment.
Adverse effects on business and consumer confidence could lead to large negative spillovers on household spending and on business investment in other sectors of the economy.
Moreover, an overall reduction in investment and dislocation of global value chains would have negative effects on productivity and potential growth.
These effects would be mitigated by a depreciation of the Canadian dollar and possibly by government measures to support affected industries and workers.
The direct effect of tariffs and exchange rate pass-through would immediately result in higher prices for some goods and reduce consumer purchasing power.
In an economy already operating at capacity, this could lead to demands for higher wage increases and, in turn, put upward pressure on prices.
In addition, there are two-sided effects associated with the demand and supply implications of the tariffs.
Weaker aggregate demand would weigh on price inflation, although reductions to potential output would work in the opposite direction.
Global financial conditions remain broadly accommodative, but could tighten suddenly.
Further escalation of trade tensions, a faster than anticipated pickup in wage and price inflation, or significant increases in expectations of the future path of monetary policy could lead to higher term premiums and equity risk premiums.
If premiums were to rise, the higher bond yields could increase capital outflows from EMEs, exacerbating country-specific vulnerabilities in some cases, and financial conditions could tighten further.
These developments could translate into a decline in activity in sectors sensitive to interest rates, a rise in debt-service burdens, weaker global and Canadian growth, and a decline in commodity prices.
The outlook for US GDP growth in 2018 has been revised up following signs in recent data of greater-than-expected strength.
However, growth over the projection horizon could be stronger if trade-related uncertainty diminishes or tax reform and deregulation trigger animal spirits.
While consumption has been weaker than expected in the first quarter of 2018, persistently elevated consumer confidence could lead to even stronger consumer spending, with a savings rate that falls below the relatively high level embedded in the projection.
The vulnerabilities associated with household indebtedness would be exacerbated if the additional spending were financed by more borrowing.
While there has been some moderation in price growth and less speculative demand in the single-family home segment, prices for condominiums have continued to increase rapidly in some markets.
Thus, there remains a risk of a sharp decline in house prices in overheated markets, which would likely dampen residential investment and consumption.
The outlook for global economic growth remains solid.
In the United States, consumer spending and business investment are expected to stay strong.
While protectionism remains a threat globally, the proposed new trade agreement between Canada, the United States and Mexico will reduce some of the trade policy uncertainty within North America.
In other regions, growth is healthy, although risks have risen in some emerging-market economies and China.
The Bank expects that the global economy will grow by about 3 3/4 per cent in 2018, before moderating to around 3 1/2 per cent in 2019.
The global economic outlook would be even stronger without US-China trade tensions and the related uncertainty.
Trade tensions are weighing on some commodity prices and have likely contributed to slower global trade and investment growth.
The Bank's projection includes the adverse effects of uncertainty on investment and the impact of recent and previously implemented tariffs by the United States and other countries.
The total drag is currently estimated to reduce the level of global gross domestic product by 0.3 per cent by the end of 2020.
However, the fallout from trade tensions is difficult to predict and could be more severe than what is included in the projection.
The effects of trade actions can build on each other in unexpected ways, and new measures could have a disproportionately large impact.
The US economy has expanded at a rapid pace in recent months, with fiscal stimulus contributing to growth that is stronger than potential.
Consumption and business investment have been robust, supported by a tight labour market.
Wage growth has been moderate but is steadily rising.
Exports surged in the second quarter, likely benefiting from a temporary boost ahead of tariffs imposed by China.
Meanwhile, supply constraints and declining affordability continue to hold back residential investment growth.
The outlook includes more drag on business investment than in the July Monetary Policy Report due to new US-China tariffs.
US businesses are reporting that trade policy uncertainty is dampening investment, although these effects are not yet evident in the data.
Tariffs put in place over the past year are leading to higher prices on some products.
The US economy is forecast to grow by around 3 per cent in 2018 and 2 1/2 per cent in 2019, above its potential growth rate.
Consumption is anticipated to rise at a healthy pace, underpinned by strong job gains and income tax cuts.
The profile for consumption is consistent with a roughly flat projection for the savings rate of around 7 per cent.
Solid private demand is expected to drive robust investment growth, helped by corporate tax cuts.
Growth is forecast to moderate to around 1 1/2 per cent in 2020, a pace that is closer to potential.
This cooling is expected to help keep core inflation from going much above 2 per cent.
The Federal Open Market Committee's median projection is consistent with a gradual rise in the Federal Reserve's policy rate.
A gradual path reduces the likelihood of a more sudden repricing of financial risk and tightening financial conditions.
Growth in the euro area was weaker than expected over the first half of 2018.
Exports were one source of drag on growth, partly because of temporary factors, including a past appreciation of the euro.
Domestic demand, meanwhile, is healthy, and the labour market continues to improve.
Euro area growth should ease from around 2 per cent in 2018 to about 1 1/2 per cent in 2020 as monetary policy becomes less accommodative and capacity becomes constrained.
Core inflation is still tepid and is anticipated to rise only gradually.
Political developments remain a source of downside risk.
The Bank's base case continues to assume an orderly Brexit, with some modest negative effects from uncertainty.
There is risk to this assumption, given that no deal is in place yet.
In Italy, a planned increase in fiscal spending has driven a rise in the spread between Italian and benchmark bond yields.
While financial conditions remain accommodative in most countries, they should become less so as advanced economies gradually remove monetary policy stimulus.
The Federal Reserve recently raised its policy rate and, in October, the European Central Bank reduced its asset purchases (quantitative easing).
Globally, bond yields have mostly risen since July, largely in parallel across the short and long ends of the yield curve.
Earlier this year, some analysts expressed concern about whether a flattening of the yield curve signals a downturn in the US economy.
However, a broader set of market-based measures suggests continued, though somewhat slower, growth in the near term.
As advanced economies withdraw monetary policy stimulus, there could be more rebalancing across asset classes.
In this context, volatility has increased in a number of asset classes since July.
EMEs are particularly vulnerable to tighter global liquidity, given a rise in debt levels denominated in US dollars in recent years.
A further appreciation of the US dollar since July has added to these pressures.
Financial market stress has been acute in EMEs with elevated levels of foreign currency debt and that have weak monetary policy frameworks.
There has been some further financial tightening in other EMEs since July, but few signs of large-scale capital outflows.
A further escalation of trade tensions, wage and inflation surprises, or a sharp rise in oil prices could lead to an even faster tightening of global financial conditions than that included in the Bank's projection.
While financial stress has intensified in Argentina and Turkey, growth in most EMEs was generally better than expected over the first half of 2018.
On net, growth in oil-importing EMEs is now forecast to be weaker than projected in July, softening to around 4 per cent in 2019 before recovering to around 4 1/2 per cent in 2020.
It is assumed in the forecast that financial contagion remains limited, although it is still a risk.
Growth in oil-exporting countries is projected to rise, given higher oil prices and less drag from fiscal consolidation.
Policy support is expected to keep China's growth in line with official targets, although downside risks have increased.
Past steps to reduce financial vulnerabilities have slowed credit growth, but are likely dampening economic growth.
Rising trade tensions with the United States are also expected to weigh on exports and investment.
Early possible signs of these effects include a softening in surveys of new export orders.
In this context, authorities have announced new fiscal and credit stimulus that should counter some of the expected drag.
A weaker renminbi should also offset some of the effects of tariffs on export growth.
Growth is forecast to ease from around 6 1/2 per cent in 2018 to around 6 per cent in 2020, somewhat softer than in the July projection and just below the rate of potential output growth.
The recent average for the price of Brent oil, the global benchmark, is US$5 per barrel higher than assumed in the July Report.
The increase primarily reflects supply declines in Iran and Venezuela.
Meanwhile, the spread between West Texas Intermediate and Western Canada Select has widened.
Demand for WCS from US refineries has dropped, since maintenance shutdowns began earlier in the year and have been more widespread than usual.
The effect on the price differential is being amplified by a faster expansion of oil sands production than of transportation capacity.
The WTI-WCS spread will likely narrow in the near term as some temporary headwinds are resolved.
The spread will likely remain volatile, however, given that it will take time to address transportation constraints.
Risks to global oil prices are balanced around current levels.
There could be greater-than-expected compliance with US sanctions on Iranian oil exports, and Venezuelan output could drop even lower.
The Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries may also be less able to fully offset production declines than in the past.
However, concerns about the impacts of trade disputes on the global outlook could weigh more heavily on prices.
The Bank's non-energy commodity price index is around 10 per cent lower than in July.
Worries over growth in China are pulling down prices for base metals.
Tariffs levied by China and Mexico against the United States have also put downward pressure on some agricultural prices since July.
In addition, lumber prices have fallen, reflecting lower-than-expected US housing demand.
Overall, the drop in WCS and non-energy commodity prices is weighing on Canada's terms of trade.
Economic growth in Canada is tracking close to potential, and its composition is now more balanced than last year.
Inflation is expected to remain within the target range and move toward 2 per cent over the projection horizon.
The Canadian economy will be supported by solid growth in both foreign and domestic demand and continuing favourable financial conditions.
Firms are expected to invest to alleviate capacity pressures and improve productivity.
The completion of negotiations toward a new United States-Mexico Canada Agreement is encouraging, because it has reduced trade policy uncertainty and the associated drag on business investment and exports.
However, the recent declines in commodity prices and the terms of trade are forecast to have a modest negative effect on investment.
Exports are anticipated to expand at a moderate pace, restrained by ongoing competitiveness challenges and limited transportation capacity.
Meanwhile, households continue to adjust to higher interest rates and changes to mortgage underwriting guidelines.
Consumption is expected to grow at a healthy pace, supported by rising wages.
The boost to income from a larger population is more than offset by the negative consequences of weaker terms of trade.
Consumer price index inflation has risen in recent months by more than was anticipated in the July Report.
Inflation reached 2.7 per cent in the third quarter of 2018, but is expected to fall back to near 2 per cent by the end of the first quarter of 2019 as the effects of temporary factors, notably related to airfares, gasoline prices and minimum wages, dissipate.
The Bank's measures of core inflation remain near 2 per cent, consistent with an economy that is operating close to capacity.
As expected in the July Report, GDP growth increased to a strong pace of 2.9 per cent in the second quarter of 2018, mainly due to a surge in exports.
The economy has solid momentum, so that even with slower export growth, real GDP is forecast to expand about 2 per cent on average in the second half of 2018.
The composition of demand has been shifting toward business investment and exports and away from consumption and housing, driven in part by households adjusting their spending in response to higher interest rates and changes to housing market policies.
In particular, higher mortgage rates, new mortgage finance guidelines, and provincial and municipal housing market policies are contributing to the softness in housing activity this year.
After sharp declines earlier in 2018, national resales have started recovering.
In the Greater Toronto Area, resales have begun to move higher, while those in the Greater Vancouver Area have stabilized.
The pace of housing starts is expected to pick up in the fourth quarter after three quarters of contraction, supported by strengthening demographic demand.
However, new construction is expected to ease modestly in the fourth quarter, reflecting the previous declines in starts and the ongoing shift toward lower-value units.
Consumption growth was solid in the second quarter and is expected to remain so in the near term, supported by steady income growth and elevated consumer confidence.
Firms are continuing to expand capacity in response to strong domestic and foreign demand, except in the oil and gas sector, where transportation constraints are an ongoing challenge.
Export growth has improved since 2017, although volatility in the volume of exports has caused fluctuations in quarterly GDP growth.
Exports were soft in the first two months of the third quarter, following the surge in the previous quarter.
According to recent trade data, US tariffs and Canadian countermeasures have reduced steel exports and imports, but have not yet visibly affected aluminum shipments.
In this context, the trade data provide only a partial view of the much broader negative impacts of the tariffs and countermeasures on many firms.
Negotiations to remove these tariffs are under way.
The economy has been operating near capacity for more than a year.
Real GDP is estimated to have grown at about potential in the third quarter, leaving the output gap the same as was reported for the second quarter in the July Report, between -0.5 and +0.5 per cent.
Firms participating in the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey reported that capacity pressures continue to be elevated and labour shortages have intensified.
The demand for labour is strong.
Employment grew by 2.0 per cent over the 12 months through July, and the unemployment rate in September, at 5.9 per cent, was near its 40-year low.
Wage gains have, however, remained moderate.
Wages, as quantified by the wage-common, were rising at 2.3 per cent in the second quarter and have been increasing at about that rate since the beginning of 2017.
Wage gains as reported in Statistics Canada's Labour Force Survey have eased over the past few months from elevated rates and are now closer to other measures of wage increases.
CPI inflation increased from 2.2 per cent in May to 3.0 per cent in July, before falling back to 2.2 per cent in September.
Readings above 2 per cent have been primarily due to temporary factors, including an increase in gasoline prices in the first quarter and a surge in airfares in July.
As a result of the unexpected increase in airfares in July and subsequent reversal in September, inflation in the third quarter rose by more than anticipated in the July Report.
All three core inflation measures have remained close to 2 per cent, reinforcing the Bank's view that the recent elevated levels of CPI inflation were caused by temporary factors.
These figures are consistent with an economy operating close to full capacity.
The Bank projects that real GDP will continue to grow in line with potential output over the projection horizon and that the shifting composition of growth will stabilize and remain broadly based across goods- and services producing industries.
Several sectors should contribute notably to the further expansion of the economy: non-residential construction outside the oil and gas sector, non-durable goods manufacturing, wholesale trade, and professional and transportation services.
The projections for investment and exports have been revised up.
Some of the negative judgment on export and investment projections related to trade policy uncertainty has been removed.
The recently negotiated USMCA reduces the uncertainty, although some remains because of the escalating trade tensions between China and the United States.
The export outlook is modestly stronger, as the positive effects of reduced uncertainty are partly offset by the impact of lower commodity prices.
The growth profile of government spending in the projection is the same as in the July Report.
By convention, only announced federal and provincial budgets are incorporated into the projection for government spending.
The outlook for consumption and housing is underpinned by income growth as households adjust to revised mortgage guidelines and higher interest rates.
In line with the expectations of firms participating in the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey, wage growth is forecast to rise, driven by tightening labour markets and an expected improvement in productivity growth.
In addition, labour income is being boosted by the larger population.
Net international migration has surged in recent quarters, mainly driven by work permit holders.
Compared with expectations in the July Report, the larger population than previously assumed has a positive effect.
This is more than offset by the weaker projection for real gross domestic income associated with the deterioration in the terms of trade.
Consumption is projected to grow at a healthy pace, although the pace of spending gradually slows in response to rising interest rates.
So far, consumption has largely evolved in line with the predictions of the Bank's models since the first increase of the policy rate in mid-2017.
After growing steadily for several years, residential investment is projected to be roughly unchanged over the projection horizon.
Higher mortgage rates and the changes to mortgage guidelines are affecting the dynamics of housing activity.
Housing resales responded quickly to the new mortgage guidelines, and the level of resale activity is expected to continue on a lower trajectory than before the changes.
New home construction is shifting toward smaller units, although stronger population growth is estimated to raise fundamental demand for housing.
Household credit growth has slowed, and the share of new mortgages with high loan-to-income ratios has fallen.
The ratio of household debt to income has levelled off and is anticipated to edge down.
While household sector vulnerabilities are expected to ease, they will remain elevated over the projection horizon.
Firms outside the oil and gas sector are expected to continue to increase capacity in the face of solid domestic and foreign demand.
Corporate profits are near historical highs, and business sentiment remains elevated.
Firms participating in the autumn Business Outlook Survey reported strong investment intentions, driven by anticipated healthy demand, capacity pressures and the need to improve efficiency to keep up with competitors.
While the overall outlook for investment is favourable, competitiveness challenges related to US tax reform and regulatory changes, as well as uncertainty around pipeline approval, are still expected to lead some exporters to delay their investments or to invest outside Canada.
Machinery and equipment manufacturers are making capacity investments to meet rising demand.
As well, large-scale investment projects, such as the LNG Canada project, are currently under way or expected to begin over the projection horizon.
Fast-growing firms in the computer systems design sector benefit from broad trends in the adoption of digital technology, both domestically and abroad.
Canada has been successful in attracting foreign investment in knowledge-intensive fields, including research and development, software design and information technology services, communications, and professional and business support services.
In the oil and gas sector, investment is expected to be roughly flat over 2019-20.
The outlook is slightly weaker than in the July Report.
The revision reflects downgraded sentiment in the industry associated with the widening of the spread between WTI and WCS and the setback in the Trans Mountain Pipeline expansion project.
Exports are expected to be underpinned by solid foreign demand and increased export capacity, especially as the adverse effects of uncertainty on business sentiment have declined with the recently negotiated USMCA.
Exports will also benefit from other trade agreements, including the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement and the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership , which are reducing barriers to Canadian exports for a wider set of countries.
Export growth is forecast to continue at a moderate pace, despite several limiting factors.
Transportation capacity is expected to remain a source of restraint on energy exports, while global trade policy uncertainty and elevated competition from other countriesespecially in the US marketalso remain sources of drag.
The Bank assesses that loss of investment competitiveness due to US tax reforms and uncertainty associated with global trade policies will together lower the level of exports by about 0.6 per cent between the third quarter of 2018 and the fourth quarter of 2020.
Exports of both commodities and non-commodities are expected to expand over the projection horizon.
Commodity exports are likely to be held back by the effects of the recent US tariffs on steel and aluminum and the lower level of non-energy commodity prices.
Overall, commodity exports should grow at a moderate pace, led by solid energy exports as production at oil sands projects continues to expand.
Growth of non-commodity exports is anticipated to be relatively broad based.
Machinery and equipment manufacturers face strong demand from rising US business investment, while aerospace exports are also expected to contribute positively to export growth in the short term.
Strong growth of services-related exports should continue, due to healthy foreign demand for professional services and information and support services amid increasing US business investment and ongoing digitalization.
In contrast, auto sector exports are expected to decline somewhat, partly reflecting the production mandates of Canadian auto assemblers.
Import growth is expected to slow from 3.4 per cent in 2018 to 1.8 per cent on average over 2019 and 2020.
This trajectory is in line with the anticipated evolution of import demand from different GDP components, notably investment.
CPI inflation is projected to decline from 2.7 per cent in the third quarter of 2018 to close to 2 per cent in early 2019 as the effects of temporary factors dissipate.
The effects of past increases in gasoline prices and minimum wages are anticipated to fade in the first quarter of 2019, while those of tariff countermeasures are expected to wane by the end of 2019.
Inflation is subsequently expected to remain close to 2 per cent, consistent with an economy operating close to potential output.
The base-case projection provides the Bank's view of the most likely outcome for inflation, although any projection is subject to considerable forecast uncertainty.
A 90 per cent confidence band around the inflation projection widens from 0.6 percentage points in the fourth quarter of 2018 to 1.5 percentage points by the end of 2020.
Most respondents to the autumn Business Outlook Survey anticipate that average inflation will remain within the Bank's target range of 1 to 3 per cent over the next two years.
The majority expect inflation to be in the upper half of that range.
The September 2018 Consensus Economics forecast for CPI inflation is 2.4 per cent in 2018 and 2.1 per cent in 2019, with long-term annual inflation expectations averaging 2.0 per cent through 2028.
The outlook for inflation is subject to several upside and downside risks.
The evolution of the most important risks since July is summarized in Table 4.
As in past reports, the focus is on those risks identified as the most important to the projected path for inflation, drawing from a larger set of risks accounted for in the projection.
Since financial vulnerabilities can magnify the impact on the economy and inflation of some adverse events, financial stability considerations are relevant in a risk-management approach to monetary policy.
Macro prudential and other financial system policies can reduce financial vulnerabilities and the severity of adverse outcomes.
For this reason, the Bank considers the joint evolution of financial stability risk and the macro economy when evaluating risks to the inflation outlook, especially when there are significant changes to this evolution.
Trade tensions between the United States and China could escalate further, and the fallout could be more severe than what is included in the projection.
The largest downside risk would be associated with structural changes involving major reallocation of capital and labour across sectors and countries.
In this context, Canadian exports and business investment could suffer from a significant weakening of foreign demand, a breakdown of global value chains, plummeting business confidence and lower commodity prices.
At the same time, there could be inflationary supply effects stemming from the increase in global input costs and lower productivity, combined with the impact of exchange rate pass-through.
On balance, there is a significant risk that the result would be lower real activity and higher inflation as this adjustment proceeds.
In contrast, if the United States and China were to negotiate an end to the tariffs imposed this year, global and Canadian economic activity would be stronger than in the base-case projection.
As well, the near term positive impacts of tariffs on prices would be removed.
Some of the negative judgment associated with trade policy uncertainty in North America has been removed in the base-case projection.
However, assuming that the agreement is ratified, the USMCA could also catalyze a larger improvement in business sentiment, leading to stronger investment and exports than in the base-case projection.
US GDP growth could be higher over the projection horizon if tax reform, deregulation or fiscal stimulus had larger positive impacts than currently embedded in the base-case projection.
Global financial conditions remain broadly accommodative but could tighten suddenly.
Several triggers could lead to higher term premiums and risk premiums.
These include an escalation of trade tensions, faster-than-anticipated pickups in wage and price inflation in advanced economies, or significant increases in expectations of the future path of monetary policy.
If premiums were to rise, the higher bond yields in advanced economies could increase capital outflows from EMEs, exacerbating country-specific vulnerabilities in some cases.
These developments could translate into a decline in activity in sectors sensitive to interest rates, a rise in debt-service burdens, lower commodity prices, and weaker global and Canadian growth.
Elevated consumer confidence could lead to stronger consumer spending and higher inflationary pressures than in the base-case projection.
In addition, a shift in housing demand to less-expensive units could free up income for consumption.
If additional spending were financed by more borrowing, then vulnerabilities associated with household indebtedness could be exacerbated.
There has been some progress in mitigating household imbalances in certain regions.
Partly reflecting the impact of various policy measures, house price growth has moderated in recent quarters and there is less evidence of speculation in some markets.
Nevertheless, price levels remain high in the greater Vancouver and Toronto areas, and the economy is in a rising interest rate environment.
Thus, there remains a risk of a sharp decline in house prices in these markets, which could dampen consumption, housing demand and construction activity.
