The Canadian economy continues to operate just above its full production capacity, and the near-term outlook for core inflation has moved slightly higher. However, with the US economy slowing more quickly than expected, the base-case projection for Canadian economic growth has been revised down slightly from that in the July Monetary Policy Report Update. Lower energy prices have led to a downward revision of the projection for total consumer price inflation. They have also contributed to moving the Canadian dollar into a somewhat lower trading range.
 
Although domestic demand in Canada has continued to grow at a robust pace, GDP growth in the second and third quarters of 2006 has been slower than expected, largely because of weaker net exports. A weaker near-term outlook for the US economy has curbed the near-term prospects for Canadian exports and growth. As well, the Bank has lowered its assumption for potential growth to 2.8 per cent for the 2006-08 period, given recent developments in labour productivity. As a result of these factors, the Bank's base-case projection for Canadian GDP growth has been lowered to 2.8 per cent this year and 2.5 per cent in 2007. But with the US economy projected to recover by the end of 2007, growth should pick up to 2.8 per cent in 2008. Such a profile implies that the small amount of excess demand now in the economy will be eliminated by the second half of 2007 and that the economy will then remain roughly in balance through to the end of the projection period.
 
With the economy currently in slight excess demand and with strong momentum in housing prices, core inflation is expected to move slightly above 2 per cent in the coming months. As the economy returns to potential and pressures from housing prices ease, core inflation should return to 2 per cent by the middle of 2007 and stay there through to the end of 2008.
 
Total CPI inflation will continue to be affected by the cut in the Goods and Services Tax and by developments in energy markets. Based on prices embedded in markets for energy futures, total inflation will likely average about 1 1/2 per cent through to the second quarter of 2007, before returning to the 2 per cent target and remaining there through to the end of the projection period.
 
The Bank of Canada left the target for the overnight rate unchanged at 4.25 per cent on 6 September and 17 October. The current level of the policy rate is judged, at this time, to be consistent with achieving the inflation target over the medium term.
 
As noted in the press release of 6 September, the risks around the base-case projection are judged to be a little greater than at the time of the July Update. The main upside risk relates to the momentum in household spending and housing prices. The main downside risk is that the US economy could slow more sharply than expected, leading to lower Canadian exports. The Bank judges that the upside and downside risks to its inflation projection are roughly balanced.
 
The correction of global imbalances is unfolding in a benign, albeit slow, manner. However, in the absence of further appropriate policy actions, there remains a possibility of a disorderly resolution of these imbalances. Consequently, the balance of risks for global and Canadian growth is tilted slightly to the downside late in the projection period.
 
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI fell to 2.1 per cent in August from 2.8 per cent in May. This drop largely reflected the impact on consumer prices of the GST reduction in July 2006, as well as lower year-to-year increases in energy prices at the consumer level. If the effect of changes in indirect taxes is excluded, the rate of increase in the total CPI was 2.6 per cent in August. The core rate of inflation, which also removes the effects of changes in indirect taxes, moved up to 2.0 per cent in July and August, after remaining at about 1.7 per cent over the first four months of this year.
 
While the rate of increase for the total CPI moved down close to the 2 per cent inflation target in August, it was somewhat higher than projected in the July Update. There was an upward surprise in the price of gasoline. As well, prices in the housing and service sectors increased at a slightly higher rate than expected. For instance, homeowners' replacement costs (an important component of core prices for shelter) have risen at a faster pace this year as a result of considerably higher prices for new housing, particularly in Alberta. Prices for other services have also increased at a slightly faster rate, mainly because of a modest rebound in automobile insurance premiums. Partially offsetting these upward pressures has been the decrease in the prices of many import-intensive goods, which reflects the effects of further declines in the world prices of many manufactured goods and the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
 
The core rate of inflation moved up to 2.0 per cent in July - earlier than expected - and remained there in August. Other measures of the trend rate of inflation that the Bank monitors have also tended to edge up close to 2 per cent, if the effects of changes in indirect taxes are excluded. These increases in trend inflation measures are consistent with the Bank's view that the economy has recently been operating just above its production capacity.
 
Canadian real GDP, after growing at an annual rate of 3.6 per cent in the first quarter of 2006, rose by only 2.0 per cent in the second quarter, less than the 3.2 per cent projected in the July Update. Currently available information suggests that real GDP grew by about 2 per cent in the third quarter of 2006. This is also less than previously anticipated and reflects evidence suggesting considerably weaker inventory accumulation by businesses than in the second quarter.
 
Final domestic demand continued to be the major contributor to GDP growth in the first half of 2006, while net exports decreased over the period. Strong overall profitability and capacity pressures in a number of industries, combined with ongoing reductions in the prices of imported machinery and equipment and favourable financing conditions, supported marked increases in capital spending by businesses. With further substantial increases in real personal disposable income and household net worth (partly reflecting a considerable rise in housing prices), the growth of household expenditures was also quite robust over this period, picking up from the pace seen in the second half of 2005.
 
Despite ongoing strength in the global economy, there was a broad-based decline in Canada's exports in the first half of 2006, which appears to be related to several factors. Exports of automotive products returned to more normal levels after being unusually high towards the end of 2005. Exports of machinery and equipment also fell sharply in the second quarter of 2006. As well, the appreciation of the Canadian dollar over the past four years continued to restrain growth in the demand for Canadian exports. There are, however, indications that export growth revived in the third quarter of 2006, suggesting that some of the weakness in the first half of the year reflected transitory factors. With ongoing firm growth in final domestic demand, imports continued to rise markedly in the first half of 2006, although at a slower pace than was observed in the second half of last year.
 
Although there has been some moderation of growth in recent months, most indicators of capacity pressures suggest that the economy was operating slightly above its production capacity in the third quarter of 2006.
 
With observed weakness in labour productivity growth, the Bank's conventional measure of potential output for the period since the beginning of 2005 was revised down slightly from the estimate used in the last Update. At the same time, the weaker economic growth in the second quarter of 2006, combined with projected growth of 2 per cent in the third quarter (compared with a projection of 3 per cent in the July Update), implies that the level of activity in the third quarter was also somewhat lower than expected. These developments are reflected in the Bank's conventional measure of the output gap, which indicates that the economy was operating about 0.2 per cent above its production capacity in the third quarter of 2006. This estimate is subject to a considerable degree of uncertainty, but the broad picture of an economy in slight excess demand is consistent with a range of other capacity indicators.
 
In the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey, the percentage of firms reporting difficulties in meeting an unanticipated increase in demand remained above average. Statistics Canada's measure of capacity utilization in the non-farm, goods-producing sector also indicated above-average pressure on production capacity in the second quarter of 2006.
 
The employment-to-population ratio in September remains very high by historical standards, while the unemployment rate has stayed low. The underlying trend increase in wages seems to have risen further in recent months and now appears to be more consistent with the indicators of tightness in labour markets than was previously the case.
 
Core inflation has been close to 2 per cent since May, despite ongoing downward pressure on the prices of globally traded durable and semi-durable goods. This appears to be consistent with an economy that has been operating slightly above its production capacity.
 
Within these national measures, it is evident that capacity pressures continue to be strongest in the western provinces. There has been a marked pickup in housing price increases in Alberta and Vancouver and, at the same time, some moderation in price gains for housing in certain urban centres in Central and Atlantic Canada. Wage increases in Alberta also continue to be markedly higher than those in other parts of the country, reflecting the differing pressures in labour markets. The Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey confirms that capacity pressures remain much more intense in the western provinces than elsewhere, with little change from the preceding survey.
 
After a review of all the indicators of capacity pressures, it is the judgment of the Governing Council that overall, the economy was operating just above its production capacity in the third quarter of 2006.
 
The trend growth in wages has continued to move higher in recent months and, as already noted, is now more consistent with other indicators of the degree of tightness in labour markets. This assessment is based on the 12-month change in average hourly earnings of permanent workers reported by Statistics Canada in the Labour Force Survey, which is considered to be a good indicator of the underlying change in wages. This measure suggests that the rate of increase in aggregate wages has risen to between 3.5 and 4 per cent. The year-to-year increase in another indicator of compensation - hourly labour compensation from Statistics Canada's Productivity Accounts - which earlier on had been boosted by unusually large one-time payments, was also about 4 per cent in the second quarter of 2006.
 
Over the past three and a half years, productivity growth in the business sector has averaged 1.0 per cent. After little change in 2003 and 2004, productivity picked up considerably in 2005, growing by 2.4 per cent. However, productivity growth appears to have slowed once again in the first half of 2006. In the absence of a sustained period with productivity growth above 2 per cent to offset the virtual absence of productivity growth in 2003 and 2004, the balance of risks around the Bank's previous assumption for trend productivity growth of about 1 3/4 per cent has shifted to the downside.
 
While assessments of trend productivity growth are difficult, the modest realized pace of productivity growth is consistent with an economy that is undergoing significant structural adjustment in the face of large movements in commodity prices, the marked appreciation of the Canadian dollar, and new sources of competition from emerging Asia. As discussed in previous Monetary Policy Reports, this adjustment involves a reallocation of labour and capital towards the production of commodities with significantly higher prices, and towards the non-tradable goods and services sectors. During the adjustment period, capital and labour are likely to be less productive. Observed trends in productivity growth suggest that this adjustment is ongoing and may be having a larger and more protracted impact on productivity growth than previously projected. With this in mind, something closer to 1.5 per cent would appear to be a more balanced assumption for trend productivity growth over the next couple of years. With the assumption regarding trend labour input growth remaining at about 1.25 per cent, this implies potential growth of about 2.8 per cent.
 
When the modest observed productivity gains are taken into account, unit labour costs in the second quarter of 2006 were up 2.6 per cent from their level a year earlier. With recent compensation increases at between 3.5 and 4 per cent and with trend productivity growth now assumed to be about 1.5 per cent, underlying increases in unit labour costs have risen but still appear to be in the range of 2 per cent.
 
The prices of non-energy commodities have remained firm since the July Update. Metals prices have risen a little further, reflecting strengthening global demand and further production disruptions. Lumber prices, in contrast, have eased as a result of the downturn in the US housing market.
 
The price of light crude oil (West Texas Intermediate), which was US$74 per barrel at the time of the July Update, averaged US$59 in the ten days ending on 13 October 2006. This decrease appears to reflect market expectations of a reduced supply risk and some easing in the prospects for global oil demand (resulting from the effect of persistently high oil prices). In recent weeks, natural gas prices were also somewhat lower than in early July, reflecting relatively high inventories following lower-than-expected demand for cooling in the late summer.
 
With the marked reduction in natural gas prices since the end of 2005, Canada's terms of trade fell back in the first half of 2006. As a result, the four-quarter change in the chain price index for GDP (a broad price measure of the goods and services produced in Canada) decreased from 4.1 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2005 to 2.8 per cent in the second quarter of 2006. Consequently, the year-to-year increase in nominal GDP moderated during this period, although still rising by some 5.7 per cent in the year ending in the second quarter of 2006. The resulting above-average increase in real income (defined as the difference between the year-to-year rise of nominal GNP and that of the deflator for final domestic demand) was still providing support for the considerable gain in final domestic demand.
 
The recent decline in the prices of crude oil and natural gas will likely lead to a further reduction in Canada's terms of trade over the remainder of 2006 and, therefore, to slower growth in nominal GDP. In turn, this reduced rate of nominal income growth can be expected to put some downward pressure on the growth of corporate profits and government revenues.
 
Since the July Update, policy interest rates have continued to move higher in a number of industrialized countries outside North America. The European Central Bank, the Bank of England, and the Reserve Bank of Australia have all raised their respective policy rates, and financial markets expect further policy tightening in 2006 and early 2007. The Bank of Japan has also raised its policy rate, effectively ending its "zero interest rate policy," now that the Japanese economy appears to be on a sustainable growth path. In contrast, policy rates in both Canada and the United States have recently been left unchanged, following a number of consecutive increases. Short-term interest rates embody expectations that policy rates in these two countries will remain at their current levels for the rest of 2006 but decline somewhat in 2007.
 
Despite some heightened inflationary concerns among market participants at the time of the last Update, inflation expectations in major industrialized countries have since moderated, partly reflecting the recent decline in energy prices and the weaker growth outlook for the US economy. Such developments have contributed to the decrease in the yields on the long-term government bonds of major industrialized countries since mid-year.
 
Currency markets have been relatively steady since the July Update, with many currency pairs trading in relatively narrow ranges. Over this period, the Canadian dollar has generally been within a range of 87.5 to 90.5 cents US, compared with the range of 88.5 to 91.5 cents US for May to mid-July assumed in the projection in the Update. It would appear that the impact on the Canadian dollar from the decline in energy prices since July has been partly offset by an increase in currency flows related to cross-border mergers and acquisitions in Canada. Since the end of 2005, the Canadian dollar has also traded within a fairly steady range against the currencies of its other major trading partners.
 
Access to credit for the non-financial business sector has remained very favourable, at a cost comparable to, or in the case of debt financing, more favourable than that at the time of the April Report. Although strong cash flow has moderated firms' borrowing requirements, business credit has continued to grow at a rate above its historical average because of a marked increase in capital expenditures.
 
Favourable credit conditions have been supported by above-average profit margins and the generally sound balance sheets of the non-financial business sector. There is, however, growing disparity in the profitability of various sectors, with resource-producing and domestically oriented sectors outperforming non-resource-based sectors exposed to trade.
 
Financial institutions continue to be in a good position to lend, as a result of their strong profitability, healthy balance sheets, and the low level of impaired loans. Financial markets also continue to have a healthy appetite for the security offerings of Canadian corporations. With Canada's economic outlook boding well for the business sector's profitability, firms should continue to have ready access to the funding needed for robust investment.
 
Financial conditions also continue to provide strong support to household spending. Increases in house prices and household credit continue to be well above historical averages. This is allowing households to finance consumption with loans secured by home equity. This phenomenon is more pronounced in Western Canada, where house prices have risen dramatically over the past two years. Despite this strong credit growth, the debt-service burden of households continues to be modest, since rates on mortgages and consumer loans remain historically low. These conditions continue to point to a strong underpinning for continued growth in household spending.
 
Since the last Report, growth in narrow money (M1+) has remained stable, driven by sustained strength in non-personal deposits resulting from firms' accumulation of cash balances. Narrow money growth suggests that near-term output growth will be slightly below the growth of production capacity.
 
This section outlines the Bank's outlook for the global economy through to the end of 2008, followed by the associated projection for the Canadian economy. This base-case projection has been developed assuming a slow and orderly resolution of global imbalances resulting from supportive policy actions to rebalance global demand and a gradual real effective depreciation of the US dollar. Energy prices are assumed to evolve along a path that is consistent with current futures prices, and the Canadian dollar is assumed to remain within the recent range of 87.5 to 90.5 cents US. The section concludes with a discussion of the risks to the base-case projection.
 
The robust global expansion, under way for the past four years, is expected to moderate only slightly over the next two years. Overall, real global GDP is projected to grow solidly: by 5.1 per cent in 2006, 4.7 per cent in 2007, and 4.5 per cent in 2008. Economic growth in emerging markets has been particularly strong, with many countries benefiting from earlier increases in export earnings stemming from high commodity prices and from the continued expansion of domestic demand. The growth of the US economy, which has been an important source of global demand in recent years, has moderated. The gradual slowing in overall global growth through the projection period reflects growing capacity constraints and the associated tightening in monetary policy by the major industrial economies.
 
Growth in Asia (excluding Japan) continues at a robust pace, with China's vigorous economy still boosting regional growth rates. The outlook for real GDP growth in China and emerging Asia remains buoyant, with only a moderate slowing over the next two years. In Japan, solid growth in investment, and to a lesser extent, in consumer expenditures, is expected to underpin economic activity over the next few years through what is likely to be an extended period of fiscal consolidation. In the euro zone, output continues to grow, although the pace of expansion will be limited by the modest growth in productive capacity.
 
In the United States, real GDP is expected to grow 3.3 per cent in 2006, slightly lower than projected in the July Update. In recent months, there has been a pronounced slowdown in the housing sector, as well as weakness in the motor vehicle sector. The slowing evident in the second quarter is projected to continue through the second half of this year, with GDP growth likely to be in the range of 2 to 2.5 per cent at annual rates - below the level of potential growth of the economy, which is now estimated at about 3.0 per cent.
 
The base-case scenario projects that US real GDP growth will remain below potential output growth into 2007 before moving above potential through 2008. This implies that a small degree of excess supply would build in the United States before being gradually absorbed in 2008. With excess supply opening up in the US economy, core inflation should move gradually lower.
 
Domestic demand growth in the United States is expected to continue to slow into 2007, owing largely to a downturn in household spending on interest-sensitive goods, such as housing, motor vehicles, and other durables. At the same time, the low cost of corporate financing and strong growth in corporate profits are expected to continue to support investment. The projected strengthening of GDP growth in 2008 stems largely from two factors. First, the housing and auto sectors are expected to stop subtracting from growth. Second, with a further assumed real effective depreciation of the US dollar of about 7 per cent over the projection horizon, and a strengthening in global investment which raises demand for US capital goods, the growth in US exports is projected to accelerate. This strengthening in export growth would contribute to a gradual improvement in the US current account deficit.
 
More broadly, with domestic demand expected to grow more slowly in the United States but more quickly in the rest of the world, demand is expected to be better balanced around the globe. In the base-case scenario, this rotation of demand is supported by the assumed depreciation of the US-dollar real effective exchange rate, which is expected to occur mainly against the currencies of emerging Asia, Japan, and some of the oil-exporting countries that did not experience a significant appreciation in the 2002-04 period. These developments are consistent with an orderly resolution of global imbalances.
 
Futures prices for crude oil and natural gas over the projection period are lower than those in the July Update. In the case of crude oil, this implies that prices would move up from their current level of just under US$60 per barrel to US$65 per barrel by the middle of 2007 and rise gradually to US$67 in 2008.
 
The price index for non-energy commodities is expected to decline over the projection period from the high levels reached in the third quarter of 2006. This partly reflects anticipated reductions in metals prices as increases in global capacity come on stream. With the weakness in US housing activity, lumber prices are likely to remain low. Even so, with global demand for commodities projected to remain relatively strong, in line with robust global growth, the overall level of non-energy commodity prices is projected to stay high in relation to historical norms.
 
In Canada, growth in final domestic demand is expected to continue to contribute importantly to economic expansion in the second half of 2006 and through 2007 and 2008.
 
Consumer spending is expected to grow at a robust pace over the projection period as a result of further gains in real disposable income and increases in household net worth. Housing investment, after another substantial gain in 2006, is projected to decline slightly in 2007 and 2008.
 
Business investment is projected to grow strongly. Factors supporting a strong expansion include current capacity constraints, expectations of ongoing growth in the global economy, indications that energy and metals prices will stay relatively high for some time, continued favourable financial conditions, strong profit levels overall and very solid balance sheets, and further reductions in the prices of imported machinery and equipment.
 
The base-case projection assumes that the government sector will run a balanced budget over the projection period. Consistent with slowing nominal GDP growth, growth in government revenues is expected to slow. The large surpluses that have been evident recently would imply that projected growth in spending by all levels of government will be above projected revenue growth for a period of time.
 
With the expected slowing in the growth of US domestic demand into 2007 and the lagged effects from the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar, export growth is projected to be weak over the projection period. At the same time, continued substantial increases in investment in machinery and equipment, combined with the further impact of the past rise of the Canadian dollar, should help to boost imports. As a result, net exports should exert a significant drag on overall growth in 2006 and 2007, although this effect should ease over the projection period.
 
The Bank's base-case outlook calls for economic growth, on an average annual basis, to be 2.8 per cent in 2006, 2.5 per cent in 2007, and 2.8 per cent in 2008. The outlook for both 2006 and 2007 is lower than that in the July Update. This lower growth mainly reflects two factors. First, the weaker US economic outlook means that the projection for net exports and, to a lesser extent, investment has been revised down. Second, since the recent trend in labour productivity has been lower than expected, the assumption for growth in production capacity from 2006 to 2008 has been revised down to 2.8 per cent.
 
This profile for GDP growth implies that the economy would stay in slight excess demand over the near term, before moving back to its production capacity in the second half of 2007. The economy would then continue to operate at about full capacity through to the end of 2008. In this base-case projection, it is the near-term slowing and the subsequent pickup in the US economy, combined with the lagged effects of past interest rate and exchange rate movements, that bring aggregate supply and demand back into balance and keep them there. Hence, in this projection, the current level of the policy rate is consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target.
 
Most indicators of inflation expectations that the Bank follows have remained quite stable since the time of the April Report, and key medium - and longer-term measures continue to be close to 2 per cent. In the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey, 78 per cent of firms expected CPI inflation to be within a range of 1 to 3 per cent, on average, over the next two years. This percentage of respondents was almost the same as in the previous three surveys. Furthermore, the average private sector forecast for total CPI inflation in 2007 was just under 2 per cent, and consensus forecasts of inflation over the longer term remained very close to 2 per cent.
 
Broad money (M2++) growth has risen to around 7 per cent, a rate which, if maintained, would be consistent with core inflation at about 2 per cent over the next year.
 
The outlook for the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI is importantly affected by the cut in the GST from 7 per cent to 6 per cent that took effect on 1 July 2006, and by developments in the markets for crude oil, gasoline, and natural gas. Available indicators suggest that total CPI inflation fell below 1 per cent in September 2006 as a result of the recent decline in crude oil and gasoline prices and the base-year effects stemming from the hurricane-related surge in energy prices in September of 2005. The prices of both crude oil and natural gas are assumed to follow the path given by futures prices, which are below the levels in the July Update. As a result, total CPI inflation is now expected to average close to 1.5 per cent from the fourth quarter of 2006 to the second quarter of 2007, a little lower than projected in the Update.
 
After the direct effect of the GST cut disappears in mid-2007, total CPI inflation is expected to average close to the 2 per cent target over the remainder of the projection period.
 
The core rate of inflation is expected to move slightly above 2 per cent through to mid-2007, given the small amount of excess demand currently in the economy and continued momentum in the price of housing. These sources of upward pressure should continue to be partly offset by further downward pressure arising from ongoing decreases in the prices of manufactured goods, although these price decreases are expected to moderate over time. As the economy returns to its production potential and housing pressures ease, core inflation is projected to move back to 2 per cent by the second half of 2007 and remain there.
 
Increases in labour compensation are expected to average about 4 per cent over the early part of the projection period before easing somewhat. Given the assumed growth of trend labour productivity of 1.5 per cent, the expected year-to-year increase in unit labour costs is projected to be slightly above 2 per cent in the early part of the projection period, declining to 2 per cent by the end of the period.
 
The Bank's base-case projection continues to be subject to important upside and downside risks. As noted in the press release of 6 September, these risks are judged to be somewhat greater than at the time of the July Update.
 
The main upside risk to the Canadian economy continues to relate to the momentum in household spending and housing prices. This momentum is linked to strong consumer credit growth. By increasing home equity and thus expanding the availability of collateral, the recent strong increases in house prices have contributed to robust growth in consumer credit. There is a risk that these linkages could be stronger than assumed or that house prices could continue to grow more rapidly than expected, resulting in higher-than-projected household spending and, hence, greater upward pressures on inflation.
 
The main downside risk to the Canadian economy relates to the possibility of a sharper slowdown in the housing sector in the United States and a broadening of the weakness in the housing sector to consumption and investment. A larger decline in domestic demand in the United States would lead to decreased demand for Canadian exports and broader weakness in the Canadian economy. This development would lead to lower inflation than in the base-case projection.
 
Related to these main risks, there are a number of other risks to the base-case projection, two of which are described below.
 
An upside risk relates to sectoral and regional capacity pressures arising from the price boom in several commodities, which are being most intensely felt in Western Canada (especially in Alberta). These pressures have led to considerable upward momentum in labour costs in that region. There is a risk that prices and wages could increase even more rapidly in Western Canada or that the transmission of inflationary pressures from there to the rest of the country could be stronger.
 
A downside risk relates to the effects of the projected slowing in US economic growth on the rest of the world, particularly in those emerging economies that are currently experiencing very strong growth. To the extent that business investment in these countries is being undertaken to meet prospective consumer demand in the United States, domestic demand growth in these countries may not be sufficient to offset the projected weaker US demand. A greater-than-expected slowing in the global economy would likely result in weaker commodity prices and a weaker profile for Canadian exports over the projection period, thus putting downward pressure on Canadian inflation.
 
Overall, the Bank judges that the risks relative to its projection for inflation are roughly balanced.
 
The correction in global imbalances is unfolding in a benign, albeit slow, manner. However, in the absence of further appropriate policy actions, there remains a possibility of a disorderly resolution of these imbalances. Consequently, the balance of risks for global and Canadian growth is tilted slightly to the downside late in the projection period.