Diverging economic prospects and shifting terms of trade continue to be dominant themes in the global economic outlook. The US Federal Reserve has started the process of gradually withdrawing exceptional monetary stimulus, reflecting further improvement in labour market conditions and its judgment that inflation will rise to its 2 per cent objective over the medium term. In contrast, other major central banks have maintained or expanded monetary stimulus in response to persistent economic slack and subdued inflation. China is continuing its transition to more sustainable growth. Prices of both energy and non-energy commodities have declined further, to their lowest levels in over a decade. Lower oil prices are driving major adjustments across the world economy and, over time, should provide a net boost to global economic activity. Meanwhile, exchange rates are helping to redistribute global demand.
 
Against this background, the global economy is expected to resume a strengthening trend over the next two years, supported by ongoing monetary policy stimulus and low oil prices. Contractionary pressures in certain emerging-market economies are also expected to ease. Nonetheless, persistent weakness in global business investment and slow progress in implementing structural reforms in a number of economies continue to limit the growth of potential output. The outlook for global growth is broadly in line with the projection in the October Monetary Policy Report, although the composition of US GDP growth is expected to be somewhat less favourable for Canadian exports in 2016.
 
The US economy appears to have expanded at a healthy pace in 2015. Recent data indicate a softening for the fourth quarter that is not expected to persist, given strong underlying fundamentals. Labour income has benefited from robust employment gains, which averaged 221,000 per month over 2015. Consumer confidence has hovered near post-recession highs. Responses to business surveys suggest that a growing number of firms plan to raise wages over the next three months. Improving labour income and lower gasoline prices have supported private  domestic demand, as reflected in near-record-high vehicle sales, robust residential construction and strong business investment outside the commodity-related sectors. The softness in the fourth quarter of 2015 reflects, in part, the effects of temporary factors (e.g., a sharp weather-related decline in utilities consumption, new mortgage regulations) as well as slower growth in some areas of the economy that had been strong in the first three quarters of the year.
 
The Bank expects the US economy to grow at close to 2 1/2 per cent over 2016 and 2017, with private domestic demand buttressed by the improving labour market, low gasoline prices and still-low interest rates. The headwinds from the global economy are expected to diminish over the projection horizon. While lower oil prices are providing some boost to consumption, recent data suggest that consumers are saving more of their income gains than expected. Lower commodity prices are also expected to lead to even weaker US investment in the oil and mining sectors during 2016, a factor that is significant for Canadian exports.
 
Accommodative monetary policy, low oil prices and past exchange rate depreciations are expected to underpin continued expansions in the euro area and Japan. The European Central Bank announced further monetary easing in December, while the Bank of Japan made adjustments to improve the effectiveness of its existing quantitative easing program. Nevertheless, growth in these economies is anticipated to remain relatively modest, restrained by weak investment and structural factors.
 
China's economy continues its shift toward a more sustainable pace and composition of economic growth, with greater reliance on market forces. While this shift is expected to be successful, the process will be protracted and may involve some volatility. Chinese equities saw large declines at the beginning of 2016, reflecting the market's reaction to a combination of technical factors and economic information. These declines are expected to have little direct impact on Chinese GDP growth, since equities make up a small proportion of household assets and play only a limited role in corporate finance in China. However, uncertainties around how smoothly the transition to a more sustainable growth path will take place could affect financial market volatility and capital flows.
 
GDP growth in China is expected to slow gradually, from just below 7 per cent in 2015 to a little over 6 per cent in 2017. As the process of rebalancing from manufacturing toward the service sector proceeds, indicators of heavy manufacturing and investment - such as industrial production - will decelerate, while services and consumption indicators should remain solid. Growth in infrastructure investment is expected to slow but to remain robust through 2017, in line with the Chinese government's stated priority to address ongoing infrastructure needs. This should continue to help support demand for commodities.
 
Growth in other oil-importing EMEs slowed in 2015, reflecting the effects of lower prices for non-energy commodities, spillovers from China's slowdown and tighter financial conditions. Brazil, in particular, has been suffering a deep recession that is now expected to be more prolonged than first anticipated. Growth in the oil-importing EMEs is projected to pick up as lower oil prices support demand, progress is made on structural reforms and distressed economies gradually improve. Emerging Asia is expected to remain the key contributor to growth. Notably, GDP growth in India will likely remain in the 7 to 8 per cent range through 2017, supported by some progress on policy reforms and lower commodity prices.
 
In the rest of the world, economic growth in oil-exporting countries is also expected to recover over 2016 and 2017, following the sharp oil-related slowdown in 2015. However, lower oil prices relative to those at the time of the October Report have led to a downward revision to the outlook for GDP growth in the rest of the world in 2016.
 
Some of the downside risks to oil prices identified in recent Monetary Policy Reports have materialized. The global price of crude oil has fallen by more than US$20 since the October Report, leaving prices about 75 per cent below their peak in June 2014.
 
The global oil market is expected to gradually rebalance as growth in world demand continues and growth in supply slows. However, the adjustment is likely to take longer than previously anticipated. Growth in the demand for oil picked up over 2015, but the degree of excess supply has become progressively larger since the second half of 2014. Many producers of low-cost conventional oil responded to the initial decline in oil prices by ramping up production, partly to compensate for the loss of oil revenues. In this context, the lack of agreement on a production quota by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries at its December meeting triggered further price declines, and it now looks less likely that additional Iranian oil supply will be offset by reductions from other OPEC members. The global oil market is now expected to remain in excess supply into 2017.
 
By convention, the Bank assumes that oil prices will remain near their recent levels. The per barrel prices for Brent, West Texas Intermediate and Western Canada Select in US dollars have averaged $37, $36 and $22, respectively, since early December.
 
Over the near term, the risks to the Bank's assumption for oil prices are still tilted to the downside. Inventories could increase from already-elevated levels, given forecasts of a warm winter in North America and Europe, planned refinery outages and the potential for Iranian oil to return to the market more quickly than expected. Geopolitical risks to oil prices over the near term are two-sided: the recent increase in geopolitical tensions in the Middle East could put upward pressure on prices, given the potential for supply disruptions, but it could also exert downward pressure if it prompts increased competition for market share among OPEC members.
 
In contrast, over the medium term, the risks to oil prices are tilted to the upside. The significant reductions in oil investment since late 2014 could leave future demand increases unmet, putting upward pressure on prices and drawing investment back into the sector. The level of prices that would balance the oil market in the medium term is still highly uncertain, particularly since technical improvements and other efficiency gains by oil-producing firms have lowered their costs of production. Shifting industry expectations of the future level of oil prices, in turn, have an important influence on supply dynamics. Prices are likely to remain volatile while this protracted process unfolds.
 
The Bank's non-energy commodity price index has also fallen below the level assumed in October, led by declines in the prices of base metals and agricultural products.
 
Excess supply persists in the global market for many base metals. Faced with falling prices, many large international mining companies, especially those producing iron ore and copper, have focused on cutting costs rather than curtailing production. These companies have also benefited from lower oil prices - a key input into the production process. Meanwhile, slower growth in Chinese heavy manufacturing and investment (activities that generate strong demand for base metals) and uncertainty about future demand have weighed on prices. Agricultural prices have also declined, owing to strong supply, while forestry prices are little changed.
 
The Bank's non-energy commodity price index is expected to remain near its recent levels over the projection horizon. The current excess supply of base metals suggests that prices may continue to fall modestly until production is cut substantially or growth in demand picks up. This decline will likely be offset by stronger prices for lumber, driven by further improvements in the US housing market.
 
The effects of the oil price shock on global economic growth continue to unfold. The negative impact on oil investment in the United States and oil-exporting economies is materializing more quickly than the positive impact from higher real incomes. The positive effects on global GDP are expected to become dominant over 2016 and 2017 and to continue beyond 2017.
 
Income gains from lower gasoline prices are being used either to boost current spending or to repay debt or increase savings, thus improving consumers' ability to spend in future years. Businesses are benefiting from a reduction in their production costs, and oil producers are contributing to productivity growth by making efforts to improve their competitiveness in a low price environment. While some of the global benefits of lower oil prices may not have translated into higher expenditures, they have nevertheless contributed to improving private and public balance sheets in some oil-importing countries, which could support future spending. In the euro area, this is facilitating ongoing deleveraging. In a number of emerging markets, including China and India, some fuel prices are regulated, which means the economic benefits of lower prices arise in part through improved government finances.
 
The differing effects of lower commodity prices on commodity exporters and importers, as well as shifting growth prospects across regions, are contributing to exchange rate movements. Terms of trade have fallen significantly among some commodity exporters (e.g., Australia, Canada, Mexico and Russia) as commodity prices have declined. In addition, lower commodity prices and the negative implications for domestic demand in oil-exporting economies have been reflected in substantial depreciations in their real effective exchange rates.
 
Among commodity importers, exchange rate movements have been more differentiated. Lower commodity prices are providing support for growth in all of these economies. Nevertheless, in the euro area, Japan and Sweden, subdued economic recoveries and low inflation have led central banks to provide additional monetary policy easing since mid-2014. As a result, the currencies of these economies have depreciated notably despite the improvements they have experienced in their terms of trade. Meanwhile, the US dollar has appreciated.
 
Exchange rate movements are facilitating a realignment of global activity. In general, real net exports as a share of real GDP have increased for commodity exporters whose real effective exchange rates have depreciated, while they have contracted for commodity importers whose currencies have appreciated. The rise in the US dollar has been a drag on GDP growth in the United States through rising imports and slower exports, but it is helping to reallocate some of the growth in US demand to other regions.
 
Since the October Report, falling commodity prices have led to tighter credit conditions for commodity producers - evident in particular in widening spreads in the high-yield sector, which has a heavy concentration of oil and gas producers. More recently, there have been sharp moves in a range of global asset prices, particularly global equity and commodities markets, reflecting, at least in part, recent volatility in Chinese capital markets.
 
The long-awaited start of the US Federal Reserve's gradual process of withdrawing policy stimulus was widely anticipated by markets and therefore had a limited immediate impact on market prices. While bond yields have fallen globally since early 2016, US short-term bond yields remain above levels in the October Report. This is in contrast to yields in other advanced economies and reflects the diverging policy stances of central banks. To forestall inflationary pressures from weaker exchange rates, central banks in several emerging markets responded to the Fed's rate increase by raising their policy rates. Spreads on US-dollar denominated corporate debt in emerging markets have also risen, albeit modestly.
 
Given the relative strength of the US economy, the US dollar has appreciated against most currencies. The strength of the US dollar, together with lower commodity prices, has led to a depreciation of the Canadian dollar since October. By convention, the Canadian dollar is assumed to be close to its recent average of 72 cents over the projection horizon, compared with the 76 cents assumed in October.
 
Inflation in Canada is evolving broadly as expected. Total CPI inflation remains near the bottom of the Bank's inflation-control range, as the downward pressure from declines in consumer energy prices is only partially offset by the temporary boost from the pass-through of the exchange rate depreciation to consumer goods prices. Most of the core inflation measures monitored by the Bank remain close to 2 per cent, since the positive effects of pass-through and the disinflationary effects of economic slack largely counterbalance each other.
 
Economic activity in Canada has recently been weaker than was anticipated in the October Report, largely because of lower commodity prices. The declines in Canada's terms of trade and in the value of the Canadian dollar over the past year and a half have set in motion complex adjustments, involving significant shifts in economic activity and a reallocation of labour and capital that will continue over the next several years. In the early stages of this process, the Canadian economy has been evolving along two tracks: in the resource sector, investment is being scaled back in response to much weaker commodity prices, job losses have been significant and production has been curtailed. Activity in the non-resource sector, meanwhile, has been relatively solid and is expected to be the main source of growth going forward. A reorientation of the Canadian economy toward the non-resource sector is being facilitated by the ongoing US recovery, the lower Canadian dollar, and accommodative monetary and financial conditions.
 
National employment has been resilient in the face of job losses in the resource sector. This resilience, together with low household borrowing costs, has supported household expenditures, underpinning overall demand in Canada. While vulnerabilities in the household sector continue to edge higher, overall risks to financial stability are largely unchanged.
 
Real GDP growth is expected to strengthen gradually through the projection horizon, with fourth-quarter-over-fourth-quarter growth of about 2 per cent in 2016 and about 2 1/2 per cent in 2017. The Bank's projection for activity over 2016-17 has been marked down in response to the additional drop in commodity prices and modestly weaker demand for Canadian non-commodity exports. The growth trajectory reflects the ongoing adjustment, with the contraction in the resource sector waning and economic activity in the non-resource sector gaining traction. Given the magnitude and protracted nature of the ongoing structural adjustment, the outlooks for both aggregate demand and potential output are highly uncertain. The Bank judges that growth in potential output is in the lower part of the range of estimates it presented in the April 2015 Report. In view of the setback to the economy, the Bank's base-case projection shows the output gap closing later than was anticipated in October, around the end of 2017. However, the Bank has not yet incorporated into its projection the impact of fiscal measures expected in the next federal budget.
 
Total CPI inflation is projected to remain well below 2 per cent through 2016, as the downward pressure from weak year-over-year consumer energy price inflation and persistent excess capacity in the economy more than offset the upward pressure from the pass-through of the exchange rate depreciation to consumer goods prices. Both total and core inflation are expected to be close to 2 per cent in 2017 once the temporary effects on inflation from the decline in gasoline prices and from exchange rate pass-through dissipate and the disinflationary effects of residual excess capacity diminish.
 
Total CPI inflation edged higher in the second half of 2015 but remains near the bottom of the Bank's inflation-control range, with the sharp drop in consumer energy prices continuing to be the largest source of disinflationary pressures. At the same time, the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar has been exerting temporary upward pressure on the prices of many imported consumer goods in Canada. The effects of exchange rate pass-through are particularly pronounced in the prices of fruits and vegetables, as well as in those of core goods such as appliances, clothing, reading material and some other food products. Aside from these transitory factors, slack in the Canadian economy has continued to be a source of downward pressure on total inflation.
 
During 2015, despite the downward revisions to expected real GDP growth, total CPI inflation was higher than anticipated. There were two key factors driving this outcome: the Canadian dollar depreciated relative to earlier assumptions, and gasoline prices were firmer than anticipated. Although gasoline prices have declined, they have not fallen as much as the reduction in crude oil prices would suggest, based on historical experience. For example, had gasoline prices more closely tracked developments in oil prices, the level of total CPI would have been 0.6 per cent lower in November 2015. In addition, the disappointment in real GDP growth was accompanied by a markdown in the assessment of potential output, leaving estimates of the degree of excess capacity in the economy broadly similar.
 
Most measures of core inflation remain in a narrow range, close to 2 per cent. Given the persistent slack in the economy, measures of core inflation would be lower without the impact of the exchange rate pass-through. For example, pass-through is estimated to have boosted CPIX inflation by about 0.5 to 0.7 percentage points in the fourth quarter of 2015, with somewhat less impact on the other measures of core inflation.
 
Economic activity in Canada rebounded as expected in the third quarter of 2015, despite a further decline in oil prices and in investment in the oil and gas sector. The non-resource sector continued to expand, supported by a steadily strengthening US economy, the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar and accommodative financial conditions, as well as by some temporary factors. Export growth firmed significantly, particularly for non-commodity exports, partly due to a short-term boost associated with the full resumption of motor vehicle production at plants that were shut down for retooling in the first half of 2015. Household expenditures grew modestly, sustained by the resilience in employment outside the resource sector and a temporary lift associated with retroactive Universal Child Care Benefit payments.
 
The Bank now estimates that real GDP growth stalled in the fourth quarter of 2015, resulting in a more pronounced slowdown than previously expected. The downward revision was driven by three main factors. First, given important supply-chain linkages between Canada and the United States (e.g., in the oil and gas sector), weaker-than-expected US industrial production likely weighed on Canadian exports. Second, in the context of declining commodity prices, business investment contracted more than expected. Third, a number of unanticipated temporary factors, including strikes in the public sector in Quebec and short-term downtime in the mining sector, dragged down economic activity.
 
Estimates of the Bank's two measures of the output gap - the structural and statistical approaches - point to material and increasing excess capacity in the Canadian economy through 2015.
 
Labour market data also indicate continued slack, and there is little evidence of wage pressures. Similarly, the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey reported that the incidence of labour shortages remains low and their intensity continues to trend downward. Given the magnitude of the commodity price shock, the Canadian labour market has performed relatively well: total employment growth was solid during 2015, with gains outside the resource sector more than offsetting losses in the resource sector; the incidence of involuntary part-time work declined noticeably; and the duration of periods of unemployment has also fallen.
 
The unemployment rate, however, has increased to 7.1 per cent. Although net job gains over the past year were concentrated in full-time positions, many of these were in the category of self-employment, which is historically associated with weak economic activity. Underlying these national indicators are the diverging trends between the energy-producing provinces and the rest of the country, notably the rapid deterioration of labour market conditions in Alberta, as indicated by sharp increases in the unemployment rate and employment insurance claims in that province. Moreover, employment growth in late 2015 was more modest than the relatively strong performance registered in the first half of the year, suggesting that labour market conditions could be softening, in part as a result of spillovers from the resource sector that are increasingly weighing on the rest of the economy.
 
Overall, the Bank judges that the amount of excess capacity remained material in the fourth quarter of 2015, between 3/4 and 1 3/4 per cent.
 
Financing conditions for households and businesses in Canada remain highly stimulative. Reductions in the Bank's policy interest rate in January and July 2015 contributed importantly to these accommodative financial conditions. For example, yields on 5-year Government of Canada bonds are now roughly 80 basis points below their average level in December 2014. However, bank funding costs have been edging up more recently, prompting some financial institutions to increase mortgage rates by about 5 to 15 basis points. As a result, effective borrowing rates for households, while still low, have risen slightly since the October Report.
 
While growth in business credit has continued to moderate in recent months, most firms surveyed in the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey still characterized credit as easy or relatively easy to obtain. Credit spreads have widened on high-yield bonds, reflecting a pickup in market volatility and declines in the valuations of riskier assets globally. In particular, issuers of corporate debt in the energy and resource sectors are facing higher borrowing costs and tighter credit conditions, based on responses to the Bank's Senior Loan Officer Survey for the fourth quarter of 2015.
 
The prices for oil and other commodities have declined since October, and the uncertainty around the evolution of prices remains pronounced. In response, firms in the oil and gas sector have again revised down capital spending plans, a possibility highlighted in the October Report. Weaker profitability and sharply lower capital expenditures in the oil and gas sector will further reduce production and exports of energy over the medium term. Likewise, in the non-energy commodity sector, lower prices and competitiveness issues are expected to add to constraints on mining activity. Consequently, the weakness in resource exports and investment will be more pronounced and more persistent than previously anticipated.
 
It is important to note that currently assumed prices for oil are approaching break-even prices on a cash flow (i.e., average variable cost) basis for many producers. As a result, there are greater downside than upside risks to production and investment stemming from oil price movements. Some firms have indicated that if prices were to fall further, threshold effects would occur. A sustained price increase of a given amount might not have a material impact on the investment and production decisions of firms; however, a sustained price decrease of the same amount could force some firms to cease operations, triggering sharp falls in production, investment and employment, and lead to expectations of more consolidation in the industry.
 
The past depreciation of the Canadian dollar is helping to improve the price competitiveness of Canadian exports and import-competing  goods and services, although the currencies of other competing commodity-producing economies, such as Australia, Mexico, Chile and Brazil, have also depreciated relative to the US dollar.  Non-commodity exports will also be supported by continued growth in foreign demand.
 
Growth in non-commodity goods exports has been led by components that are sensitive to movements in the Canadian dollar, roughly two-thirds of which are showing positive momentum and are outperforming those that are less exchange rate sensitive.
 
While the growth of non-energy exports slowed in late 2015, many subcategories of non-energy-commodity and non-commodity goods exports - such as potash, seafood products, and ships, locomotives and rapid transit equipment - showed sizable gains during 2015.
 
In the services sector, travel services have benefited from the lower Canadian dollar and the resulting change in travel patterns. The number of international visitors to Canada has picked up, while the number of Canadians going abroad has declined.
 
The Bank's latest Business Outlook Survey indicated that firms engaged in non-commodity exports are more optimistic about growth in their sales prospects over the coming year than firms that are more oriented toward domestic sales. In this context, the survey provides continued evidence of firms actively pivoting their sales efforts toward faster-growing foreign markets and highlights the facilitating role played by the lower Canadian dollar.
 
Business investment is expected to expand starting in the second half of this year as the drag from reductions in spending in the oil and gas sector dissipates. However, the latest Business Outlook Survey indicated a further deterioration in investment intentions in the Prairies, and weakening is now evident in other regions as well.
 
Outside the resource sector, investment is expected to strengthen gradually, similar to that already experienced in the United States: in the winter Business Outlook Survey, a number of firms reported that robust exports are leading to stronger spending intentions. Exporters not tied to commodities have positive investment intentions overall in response to stronger foreign demand and the boost to competitiveness coming from the lower dollar. As domestic production becomes more competitive, a few firms reported plans to move production back to Canada. The survey results also indicate that the lower Canadian dollar is helping to support competitiveness for domestically oriented firms. For instance, tourism-related activity has increased and further gains are expected.
 
The Business Outlook Survey also highlighted some challenges from the lower Canadian dollar: the majority of firms surveyed face higher costs for imported inputs and investment goods, and some plan to respond by switching from foreign to Canadian suppliers.
 
Household expenditures are expected to continue to grow at a moderate pace over the projection period. The loss of income and wealth associated with the deterioration in the terms of trade will have a dampening effect on spending. This effect will be gradually offset, however, by growth in the non-resource sector, which will help to support labour demand and income and thus household expenditures.
 
Over the projection horizon, consumption is expected to grow roughly in line with disposable income. At the same time, as a result of the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar, domestic consumption patterns are expected to shift toward domestically produced goods and services.
 
Major Canadian housing market indicators remain strong: yearly growth in house prices is robust, sales of existing homes are above their historical average and the recent pace of housing starts exceeds demographic demand. Strength in national indicators is being driven primarily by elevated activity in two markets - Greater Toronto and Vancouver. Over the projection horizon, regional divergences in housing activity are expected to gradually fade and the contribution to real GDP growth from residential investment will decline.
 
Low interest rates and higher house prices have led to strong growth in mortgage credit, recently pushing up the year-over-year growth of overall household credit to 5 per cent. Looking ahead, despite recent increases, mortgage and consumer borrowing rates are still low and are expected to continue to support mortgage and consumer credit growth. Consequently, the overall ratio of debt to disposable income will likely edge higher in the near term.
 
However, as the economy strengthens and household borrowing rates begin to normalize over the projection horizon, the housing market and household indebtedness are expected to stabilize. This will help reduce the disparity between house price and credit growth on one hand and nominal household income growth on the other.
 
The drop in commodity prices and its impact on income and wealth will continue to put downward pressure on government revenues. However, overall, fiscal policy in Canada is expected to provide an increasing contribution to economic growth over the projection horizon. The Bank's base-case economic scenario reflects the fiscal measures announced since the October Report, notably the increase in expenditures contained in the Alberta budget and changes to federal marginal income tax rates introduced at the beginning of 2016. Combined, these additional measures are estimated to provide modest support to economic activity, raising the level of real GDP at the end of 2016 by about 0.1 per cent.
 
The federal government has indicated that further fiscal policy measures are likely to occur. These measures are not included in the base-case scenario and represent an important upside risk to the outlook. The nature of this upside risk depends on the timing, size and types of fiscal measures. In particular, government infrastructure investment tends to generate broader spillovers to the economy and thus is associated with larger multipliers than other forms of government spending or changes in taxes or transfers. At the same time, infrastructure spending typically involves longer lags between decisions to increase spending and actual expenditures.
 
Given the magnitude and pace of the commodity price decline and the complexity and protracted nature of the adjustment process - with important structural and cyclical implications - there is particular uncertainty about the recovery in aggregate demand and economic activity, the level and evolution of potential output, and thus the timing of the economy's return to full potential.
 
On an average annual basis, growth is expected to increase to 1.4 per cent in 2016 before firming to 2.4 per cent in 2017. The ongoing weakness in investment suggests that potential output growth is more likely to be in the lower part of the Bank's range of estimates presented in the April 2015 Report.
 
The contraction of investment is expected to end around the middle of 2016. In the second quarter, real GDP growth is projected to begin to exceed potential growth, leading to a narrowing of the output gap. In view of the extraordinary uncertainty, in the Bank's base-case projection, the Canadian economy is expected to return to potential later than anticipated in the October Report, around the end of 2017.
 
Total CPI inflation is expected to remain well below 2 per cent through 2016, as disinflationary pressures associated with weak year-over-year gasoline price inflation and excess capacity in the Canadian economy more than offset the positive effects of exchange rate pass-through on inflation. The significant disinflationary effect of lower gasoline prices will fade through 2016, although downward pressure associated with a return to a more typical relationship between gasoline and crude oil prices is expected through most of the year.
 
The Bank estimates that the upward pressure on total CPI inflation from exchange rate pass-through was about 0.9 to 1.1 percentage points in the fourth quarter of 2015. Based on the assumption of a Canadian dollar at 72 cents US, the effect of pass-through is expected to gradually decline through 2016 and into 2017. However, given the depreciation of the Canadian dollar in recent months, there is a risk that pass-through will remain higher before declining. In 2017, the residual upward pressure from pass-through and the modest downward pressure associated with remaining excess capacity will largely counterbalance each other so that total CPI inflation and core inflation are projected to be close to 2 per cent.
 
Medium-term inflation expectations have continued to be well anchored at 2 per cent. The January Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation was 1.8 per cent for 2016 and 2.0 per cent for 2017. While results from the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey indicate that a large majority of firms continued to expect CPI inflation to remain within the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range over the next two years, a greater proportion expected inflation to be in the lower half of that range.
 
Based on the past dispersion of private sector forecasts, a reasonable range around the base-case projection for total CPI inflation is ±0.3 percentage points. This range is intended to convey a sense of forecast uncertainty. Fan charts, which are derived using statistical analysis of the Bank's forecast errors, provide a complementary perspective.
 
The Bank's base-case projection is consistent with fiscal policy announcements made by federal and provincial governments up to January 2016. Recent public statements by senior government officials indicate that the upcoming federal budget will include additional fiscal stimulus. This stimulus will boost domestic demand relative to that in the base-case projection, pulling forward the closing of the output gap. The size and timing of the effects, however, will depend on the details of the measures. When more details become available, the Bank will assess the impact of the fiscal package on the outlook for growth.
 
Aside from the prospective fiscal measures, the Bank's outlook is subject to several risks emanating from both the external environment and the domestic economy. The Bank judges the following risks to be roughly balanced over the projection horizon.
 
The commodity price shock has sparked a complex set of structural adjustments within the Canadian economy. In the resource sector, investment has been sharply curtailed and labour reductions continue. At the same time, capital and labour are being reallocated to the non-resource sector, a process that will take years to unfold and that has important consequences for the level and growth rate of potential output. By their nature, these consequences are difficult to estimate. The Bank judges that, to date, the adjustments mean that near-term potential output growth is likely in the lower part of the range of estimates provided in the April 2015 Report. However, there is considerable uncertainty around assessments of the impact of the commodity price shock on the level and growth rate of potential output. Consequently, the starting point and expected profile of the output gap may be narrower, posing an upside risk to inflation.
 
The pass-through from the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar to total inflation is expected to average 0.7 percentage points in 2016. Given the size and speed of the depreciation, there is a risk that pass-through may be greater than expected based on historical experience. When a large depreciation occurs over a short period, the pass-through to prices could be relatively rapid and thus have a greater impact on annual inflation. In such a situation, inflation expectations might increase, posing an upside risk to projected inflation.
 
Given the magnitude of the oil price decline, it is becoming increasingly likely that important adverse threshold effects on economic activity may occur. If prices were to fall to a sufficiently low level that a firm had difficulty covering ongoing operating costs (i.e., average variable costs), then not only would investment and employment be affected, but the firm could also stop operating and be forced into bankruptcy. The relevant thresholds differ across firms. If a significant part of the industry were affected by thresholds, the resulting negative confidence effects and demand spillovers could weigh heavily on the broader economy.
 
A number of factors could impair EME growth. For example, growth in China may slow more than expected while authorities work to rebalance its economy. Brazil and some other EMEs also could experience weaker growth as they adjust to declines in their terms of trade and higher volatility in capital flows. Weaker growth in EMEs would dampen US exports (which often have considerable Canadian content), further undermine confidence, push down commodity prices, and increase uncertainty and financial volatility.