The global economy has continued to grow at a robust pace since the July Monetary Policy Report Update. Canada's economic growth in the first half of the year was somewhat stronger than had been expected. Overall, the economy now appears to be operating at full production capacity.
 
At the same time, the global and Canadian economies have continued to experience significant movements in energy prices. While the spikes in crude oil and gasoline prices caused by hurricanes in the Gulf of Mexico have already reversed, prices for natural gas and heating oil, as well as gasoline, are substantially higher than they were at the time of the July Update.
 
As well, the Canadian dollar has been trading in a higher range against the US dollar since late summer, and has strengthened even further against other major currencies. This recent strength appears to be underpinned by fundamental factors, including high prices for crude oil and natural gas and Canada's generally solid economic performance.
 
Past and recent movements in energy prices and in the exchange rate for the Canadian dollar, along with competitive pressures from China and other newly industrialized economies, are giving rise to significant ongoing adjustments in the Canadian economy. This has resulted in considerable variation in the growth patterns of sectors and regions, making an assessment of overall capacity pressures and of the future growth of potential output particularly complex. Given these adjustments and the slow growth of productivity in recent years, the Bank has slightly reduced its estimate of potential output growth for 2005 and 2006.
 
The Bank's base-case projection sees the Canadian economy remaining at capacity through 2007. Real GDP is expected to grow at about the same pace as potential output over the projection period, averaging 2.8 per cent in 2005, 2.9 per cent in 2006, and 3 per cent the following year.
 
With the economy operating at capacity and with the increase in energy prices, pressures on consumer prices are somewhat stronger than they were at the time of the July Update. The annual rate of increase in the consumer price index probably spiked above 3 per cent in September. On the assumption that energy prices evolve in line with currently prevailing futures prices, CPI inflation is projected to average close to 3 per cent for the rest of 2005 and for the first half of 2006 before returning to the 2 per cent target in the second half. In contrast, core inflation should remain below 2 per cent in coming months. But with the economy operating at capacity and longer-term inflation expectations appearing to be well anchored, the Bank expects core inflation to return to 2 per cent by mid-2006.
 
The Bank's base-case outlook for output and inflation is subject to a number of risks and uncertainties. Over the next four to six quarters, these risks include the adjustment of the Canadian economy to global developments, uncertainty about the current level and future growth of potential output, and the evolution of energy prices. These short-term risks appear to be balanced. But as we look further out to 2007 and beyond, there are increasing risks that the unwinding of global economic imbalances could involve a period of weak global growth.
 
The Bank raised its key policy interest rate by 25 basis points on 7 September and again on 18 October, bringing it to 3 per cent.
 
In line with the Bank's outlook, and given that the Canadian economy now appears to be operating at capacity, some further reduction of monetary stimulus will be required to maintain a balance between aggregate supply and demand over the next four to six quarters, and to keep inflation on target. However, with risks to the global outlook tilted to the downside as we look to 2007 and beyond, the Bank will monitor international developments particularly closely. More generally, the Bank will continue to assess the adjustments and underlying trends in the Canadian economy, as well as the balance of risks, as it conducts monetary policy to keep inflation on target over the medium term.
 
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI showed considerable volatility over the first eight months of 2005 and averaged just over the Bank's 2 per cent inflation-control target. The core rate of inflation, an indicator of the underlying trend, averaged 1.6 per cent over the same period.
 
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI showed marked volatility in the first half of 2005, moving in a range of 1.6 to 2.4 per cent. This mainly reflected fluctuations in gasoline prices. Indeed, with the further substantial rise in crude oil prices since late May, total CPI inflation reached 2.6 per cent in August. It likely spiked above 3 per cent in September as a result of the surge in gasoline prices following disruptions to US refinery production caused by recent hurricanes.
 
The core rate of inflation was 1.7 per cent in August. This was the rate projected for the third quarter in the July Update. Other measures of the trend rate of inflation that the Bank follows also continued to be below 2 per cent.
 
Decreases in the global prices of various consumer goods and the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar, which have contributed to declines in the prices of many import-intensive goods, have remained an important source of downward pressure on core inflation so far in 2005. Fluctuations in motor vehicle prices have accounted for much of the short-term movement in the core rate of inflation.
 
Real GDP increased at an annual rate of 2.7 per cent in the first half of 2005, faster than expected at the time of the July Update. Thus, the level of activity at mid-year was slightly higher than anticipated. The Bank's monitoring of available information and its assessment of the modest adverse economic effects arising from the recent hurricane induced disruption of the US economy point to Canadian GDP growth of about 3 per cent in the third quarter of 2005.
 
Final domestic demand continued to show strong gains in the first half of 2005. Moreover, net exports were little changed, on balance, following a substantial reduction in the second half of last year.
 
The recovery in Canada's exports in the first half of the year was supported by strong economic growth in the United States. The appreciation of the Canadian dollar through 2003 and 2004, which had contributed importantly to the decline in exports in the second half of 2004, did not appear to have significant additional adverse effects on the level of exports in the first half of 2005. Exports of machinery and equipment rose particularly strongly, while exports of automotive products eased. Imports also rose with the strength in final domestic demand, but were held back by a reduction in inventory investment.
 
This decline in inventory investment largely reflected the response of manufacturers and wholesalers to the drop in foreign demand in the second half of 2004. Business capital spending, in contrast, continued to make significant gains during the first half of 2005, with strong investment in structures, as well as in machinery and equipment. Household expenditures also rose markedly as a result of further gains in real incomes and personal wealth.
 
Data on narrow money are generally consistent with the Bank's current monitoring of growth in real GDP of about 3 per cent in the third quarter of 2005 and some slowing in the fourth quarter.
 
The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap suggests that the economy was operating at its production capacity in the second quarter of 2005.
 
Statistics Canada's measure of capacity utilization in the non-farm, goods-producing sector continues to indicate greater pressure on production capacity than the Bank's conventional estimate of the output gap. As well, the proportion of companies reporting labour shortages in the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey was well above average, while the percentage of firms reporting difficulties meeting an unanticipated increase in demand was also somewhat higher than average. The constraints are strongest in the construction, commodity-producing, and transportation services sectors.
 
Other indicators, however, point to less pressure on capacity. The core rate of inflation has remained below 2 per cent since the end of 2003. Similarly, although some measures of wage increases have picked up, overall, wage gains have continued to be moderate.
 
In the July Update, the economy was seen as operating a bit below its capacity in mid-2005. After reviewing all the indicators of capacity pressures, the Governing Council now judges that the economy was operating at its production capacity in mid-2005. This reflects both faster-than-expected growth in the first half of 2005, and a judgment that the level of potential output is slightly lower than previously assumed.
 
Companies always face the challenge of adjusting to changes in their economic environment. Strong competition from newly industrialized economies (particularly China), the appreciation of the Canadian dollar, and rising energy prices have made the adjustment process even sharper than usual. The resulting large changes in the relative prices of commodities and manufactured goods have given rise to sectoral and regional differences in economic growth.
 
Capacity constraints are most apparent in Western energy-producing provinces, where increases in oil and gas prices have raised revenues and generated gains in profits and investment. The sudden expansion in economic activity has created labour shortages - not just in the energy sector, but in other sectors that must compete for the same pool of workers.
 
The situation for the manufacturing sector is somewhat different. Since manufacturing firms export a significant portion of their output, the large appreciation of the Canadian dollar since 2002 has made their goods less competitive.
 
Adapting to these rapid changes in their competitive position has been difficult for many firms. Nonetheless, evidence from the Bank's surveys confirms that companies are adjusting to changing economic conditions. Moreover, the results of the Bank's latest Business Outlook Survey suggest that investment and hiring intentions remain strong across all regions and most sectors, and that, overall, companies remain positive about the outlook.
 
The underlying rate of increase in wages, based on such measures as the average hourly earnings of permanent workers and hourly labour compensation in the business sector, appears to have been in a range between 2.5 and 3.5 per cent in recent months. At the same time, the year-to-year gain in hourly labour compensation in the business sector picked up to 2.7 per cent in the second quarter of 2005.
 
Labour productivity in the second quarter of 2005 was up only 0.6 per cent from its year-earlier level, after two years of virtually no growth. With this modest increase in productivity over the past year, unit labour costs in the business sector in the second quarter of 2005 were 2 per cent higher than year-earlier levels.
 
The persistence of the weakness in realized labour productivity growth is increasingly at odds with the Bank's assumption of 1.75 per cent growth in trend labour productivity, which underlies our assumption of 3 per cent growth in potential output. Weakness in labour productivity growth has been broad based, showing up in the manufacturing, construction, and services sectors. While a number of sector-specific factors are contributing to this weakness, a common factor may be that the economy has been working through significant adjustments to large changes in relative prices. Taken together, the observed weakness in labour productivity, the ongoing adjustments across sectors, and the evidence of capacity pressures all suggest that growth in trend labour productivity has been running below 1.75 per cent in the recent period and could take some time to return to that rate.
 
The year-to-year rise in Canada's terms of trade eased substantially during the first half of 2005, as the global prices of many of Canada's exports of agricultural and industrial commodities stabilized. As a result, the chain price index for GDP (a broad price measure of the goods and services produced in Canada) rose 2.2 per cent between the second quarter of 2004 and the second quarter of 2005, which was considerably less than the year-to-year gain over much of the preceding year.
 
Crude oil prices, which were US$58 per barrel at the time of the July Update, averaged US$63 per barrel in the 10 days ending on 14 October 2005. The large increase in crude oil prices since the end of 2003 has resulted mainly from a substantial rise in the global demand for energy. Natural gas prices have surged in recent months, moving from just under US$8 per MMBtu at the time of the July Update, to about US$14 per MMBtu in the 10 days ending on 14 October, owing to hurricane related supply disruptions in US production, as well as the effects of particularly hot summer weather in the United States on electricity demand and, hence, on the demand for natural gas.
 
Overall, the prices of non-energy commodities have changed little since mid-2005. Lumber prices have eased as a result of increased supplies. At the same time, the impact of several strikes constrained supply and contributed to a further rise in metals prices.
 
The substantial increases in the prices of natural gas and crude oil since mid-2005 are expected to lead to an improvement in Canada's terms of trade and real income, resulting in further pronounced gains in corporate profits.
 
Since the April Monetary Policy Report, financing conditions have continued to be favourable, and risk premiums have remained low. Business and household credit continue to advance at a steady pace. The Canadian dollar has appreciated against the US dollar and other major currencies over the same period.
 
Business-credit conditions have remained advantageous for borrowers since the April Report, both in Canada and globally. In financial markets, corporate bond yields and credit spreads have remained low for both investment-grade and non-investment-grade borrowers. Narrow credit spreads reflect healthy corporate balance sheets, continued investor demand for higher-yielding securities, and a high level of liquidity in global financial markets. Easy access to capital markets is indicated by the robust growth in the gross issuance of corporate bonds.
 
Equity markets in the United States are broadly unchanged from the time of the April Report, but most other major equity markets have risen, partly reflecting strong corporate profits. In Canada, the TSX composite index increased by about 9 per cent, led by gains in energy-sector stocks over the period.
 
Total business credit continued to grow at about 6 per cent per annum. Growth in both short-term and long-term business credit remains solid. One factor driving the demand for credit has been investment to enhance efficiency. Investments aimed at increasing capacity appear to be primarily in the energy sector.
 
On the household side, strong consumption and activity in the housing market continue to be supported by rapid growth in total household credit. Robust employment growth and low interest rates continue to keep household balance sheets healthy, as indicated by a historically low debt-servicing ratio and a low delinquency rate.
 
Yields on short-term US bonds have risen, while those on longer-term issues have moved up modestly since the April Report. The increase in yields at the short end mainly reflects increases in the federal funds rate, which now stands at 3.75 per cent. US federal funds futures currently imply a policy rate of 4.25 per cent by the end of 2005, a level that is modestly higher than was implied by futures prices at the time of the last Report.
 
The low level of yields on long-term bonds in the United States and in most industrial countries seems to be largely explained by factors pushing up desired global savings relative to business investment.
 
Canadian policy rates remain below those in the United States. This has resulted in a wider differential between US and Canadian interest rates across the yield curve. Yields on two-year Canadian bonds are approximately 80 basis points below those on US Treasuries, compared with 60 points lower at the time of the April Report. Yield spreads on longer-term bonds have also continued to widen.
 
After trading in a range of 79 to 83 cents US for most of 2005, the Canadian dollar has been trading in a higher range of 84 to 86 cents US since late summer. Most other major currencies have weakened against the US dollar over that same period. As a result, the Canadian dollar has risen more sharply against other major currencies. The recent strength in the Canadian dollar appears to be underpinned by fundamental factors, including higher energy prices and Canada's generally solid economic performance.
 
The outlook begins with a base-case projection for the global and Canadian economies and for inflation. The base case has been developed assuming energy prices consistent with current futures prices; a smooth and orderly resolution of global imbalances over the medium term, involving a modest and gradual further real effective depreciation of the US dollar; and a relatively stable Canada-US exchange rate over the policy horizon. This is followed by a discussion of the risks surrounding the projection. These risks are particularly noteworthy as we look to 2007 and beyond, given the uncertainties related to the manner in which global imbalances will be unwound.
 
In the Bank's base-case projection, the profile for crude oil and natural gas prices is based on current futures prices. This implies that the price for crude oil will be just below US$65 per barrel through 2006 and 2007. Natural gas prices are assumed to remain at or above US$10 per MMBtu through 2007Q1 before falling below US$10 per MMBtu through the rest of 2007. These higher energy prices are expected to have a small restraining effect on both aggregate supply and demand in the global economy.
 
Real prices for non-energy commodities are assumed to remain near current levels through 2006 and 2007, since supply is expected to expand roughly in line with demand.
 
The base-case outlook for GDP growth in the United States and in the major overseas economies suggests that the global economy will continue to expand at about 4 per cent per year over the projection horizon.
 
Economic growth in Asia is expected to remain robust, despite higher energy prices. China and the other Asian newly industrialized economies continue to expand rapidly, and will continue to do so over the next few years. As well, the economic expansion in Japan appears to be building momentum. The rate of inflation in Japan is expected to turn positive by the end of 2006.
 
In contrast, growth in euro zone economies remains sluggish and is expected to average 1.2 per cent in 2005, a somewhat weaker performance than anticipated at the time of the last Report. Economic activity in the euro zone has not been as strong as expected, partly reflecting uncertainty concerning labour market and other structural reforms, as well as higher energy prices. GDP growth in the euro zone is projected to pick up gradually over the next two years as domestic demand recovers.
 
Data on the US economy suggest that growth has been relatively strong. Real US GDP expanded at an annual rate of 3.3 per cent in the second quarter of 2005. Monthly indicators support a further pickup in activity in the third quarter, led by particularly robust housing activity and consumer spending. The effects of Hurricane Katrina and higher energy prices will, however, have a dampening impact on the US economy for the remainder of this year.
 
Accordingly, US GDP is expected to grow by 3.5 per cent in 2005, somewhat less than the 3.7 per cent anticipated at the time of the July Update. Economic activity is expected to pick up slightly in 2006, as the adverse effects of higher energy prices are more than fully offset by increased construction associated with the cleanup and rebuilding of storm-damaged areas. In 2007, the US economy is expected to slow modestly, as domestic demand retreats, owing to increases in US policy rates and increased household and government savings.
 
This base-case projection assumes that global imbalances will be resolved over an extended period, with relatively modest year-to-year movements. Thus, the US current account deficit, which is largely matched by surpluses in Asia and in oil-exporting countries, starts to gradually unwind in 2007. This unwinding involves increased domestic demand in Asia, Europe, and oil-exporting countries in 2007; an increase in private and public savings in the United States; and a further real effective depreciation of the US dollar, which shifts demand towards US exports and reduces the US demand for foreign imports.
 
In the base-case projection for Canada, solid growth in final domestic demand is expected to continue to contribute importantly to economic expansion in the second half of 2005 and through 2006 and 2007.
 
Several factors point to further strong increases in business investment. These include an expanding global economy and indications that energy and non-energy commodity prices will remain high for some time, the high rate of capacity utilization in a number of capital-intensive industries, continued favourable financial conditions, strong profit levels and balance sheets, and earlier reductions in the prices of imported machinery and equipment.
 
After a substantial advance in 2005, consumer spending is expected to rise solidly through 2006 and 2007, albeit at a more modest pace than in 2005 and somewhat less than projected in the July Update. Higher energy prices will tend to dampen consumption growth, as will the slightly lower income growth from the lower assumed profile for potential output. Nonetheless, still-robust gains in real incomes and relatively low long-term interest rates should help support the pace of consumer spending in 2006 and 2007. Consumer confidence, which recently fell in the immediate wake of hurricanes in the United States, is expected to recover. Housing investment is expected to be little changed, on balance, following strong increases in recent years.
 
The base-case outlook continues to incorporate an assumption of relatively strong growth in total spending on goods and services by all levels of government combined, with overall spending on goods, services, and transfers rising at about the same rate as revenues.
 
With continued strong growth in the US economy, exports are expected to continue to rise, while strong investment in machinery and equipment will continue to stimulate imports. The adjustment of exports and imports to the appreciation of the Canadian dollar through 2003 and 2004 is now well advanced. But, on the assumption that the Canadian dollar continues to trade in its recent range of 84 to 86 cents US, there will be further effects on trade. While there is considerable uncertainty regarding the speed and magnitude of the effects of exchange rate movements on net exports, on balance, net exports are expected to exert a small drag on overall growth through 2006 and 2007. This is a somewhat weaker track for net exports in 2006 than that in the July Update, owing largely to the stronger Canadian dollar.
 
The Bank's base-case projection therefore calls for economic growth, on an average annual basis, to be 2.8 per cent in 2005 rising gradually to 2.9 per cent in 2006 and to 3.0 per cent in 2007. This is in line with the latest Consensus Economics outlook. The outlook for growth is a little higher in 2005 and a little lower in 2006 than at the time of the July Update, reflecting the elimination of the output gap and a modest reduction in the assumed growth rate of potential output through 2005 and 2006.
 
On a quarterly basis, the Bank projects that real GDP growth will edge down to about 3.0 and 2.7 per cent in the third and fourth quarters of 2005, respectively. It will then increase modestly to close to 3 per cent over the four quarters of 2006 and through 2007. This base-case projection incorporates some further reduction in monetary stimulus to maintain a balance between aggregate supply and demand in the Canadian economy and thus keep inflation on target. The economy continues to operate at about its production capacity throughout the projection horizon.
 
Although most indicators of near-term inflation expectations that the Bank follows have edged up in recent months, key medium- and longer-term measures remain well anchored to the 2 per cent target. While 70 per cent of firms in the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey expect CPI inflation to be within a range of 1 to 3 per cent, on average, over the next two years, the percentage of respondents expecting inflation to be above 3 per cent rose appreciably from the preceding survey. Nevertheless, the average private sector forecast for total CPI inflation over the longer term is near 2 per cent.
 
Total CPI inflation is projected to average near to 3 per cent for the rest of 2005 and for the first half of 2006, before returning to the 2 per cent target in the second half of 2006. For the next year or so, total CPI will continue to be importantly affected by recent developments in the market for crude oil, natural gas, gasoline, and heating oil. While gasoline prices, on a month-to-month basis, are expected to ease somewhat through to early 2006, consumer prices for natural gas are projected to increase considerably over the same period, as recent increases in wholesale prices become reflected in regulated prices and contracts.
 
Core inflation is projected to continue to average close to 1.6 per cent through to the end of 2005. The past appreciation of the Canadian dollar, together with expected ongoing reductions in the world prices of some consumer goods (owing to increasing supplies from countries such as China) and some temporary effects related to automobile prices, are exerting some downward pressure on inflation.
 
With the economy expected to be operating at production capacity and inflation expectations well anchored, total CPI inflation should decrease to the 2 per cent target in the second half of 2006. The core rate is projected to rise to 2 per cent by mid-2006 and to remain there through 2007, owing to these same factors. This assumes that there is little pass-through from higher oil and natural gas prices and the recent appreciation of the Canadian dollar into core inflation, consistent with experience in recent years.
 
Increases in average hourly earnings of permanent workers are expected to rise over the projection period. At the same time, however, with a significant improvement in the growth of labour productivity, the projected year-to-year increase in unit labour costs over this period, should remain around 2 per cent.
 
The base-case projection incorporates a number of assumptions: global energy prices evolve in line with current futures prices; productivity growth in Canada continues to recover; there is little feed-through from higher oil and gas prices into core inflation; there is a gradual unwinding of global imbalances; and the Canadian dollar continues to trade in its recent range relative to the US dollar. Clearly there are risks and uncertainties around each of these assumptions.
 
Over the next four to six quarters, risks to the base-case projection for Canada appear to be balanced. There are both upside and downside risks to global economic activity, stemming primarily from future energy prices and the pace of growth in China. For Canada, these global risks could affect the evolution of net exports, commodity prices, and the exchange rate.
 
Adjustment to the appreciation of the Canadian dollar, higher commodity prices, and increased competition from China and other newly industrialized economies is so far proceeding in line with expectations. However, there are still both upside and downside risks to exports and imports as this continuing adjustment unfolds.
 
The ongoing adjustment and large relative price changes also pose some risks to the outlook for inflation. While the balance of indicators suggests that the economy is operating at its production potential, sectoral and regional shifts occurring in the Canadian economy make the overall assessment of capacity pressures particularly complex. With the economy operating at its production potential, there is also the risk that higher energy costs could feed through more broadly to the prices of non-energy goods and services, increasing the upward pressure on inflation. The risk of this affecting longer-term inflation expectations should be mitigated, however, by monetary policy clearly focused on achieving the 2 per cent target.
 
Looking to 2007 and beyond, there are risks related to the manner in which global imbalances will be unwound. The imbalances remain sizable, and the longer they persist without appropriate policy actions being taken, the higher is the risk that their resolution could involve a period of weakness in worldwide aggregate demand.
 
The principal risk is that, as the savings rates of households and governments begin to rise in the United States, domestic demand elsewhere in the world fails to pick up sufficiently to sustain global demand. Uncertainty related to structural reform appears to have resulted in increased precautionary savings in significant parts of Europe, while in China the need to self-insure against health risks and to provide for education costs is leading households to save a very large proportion of their income gains. More recently, higher oil prices are shifting current account surpluses towards oil-exporting countries, which may dampen global demand if these increased oil revenues do not translate sufficiently into increased import demand by these countries. For the base-case projection to be realized, US consumers and governments need to spend less and save more, and policy actions need to be taken elsewhere to encourage stronger domestic demand.
 
There is also the risk of an abrupt and disorderly adjustment. This would likely involve large movements in exchange rates and other asset prices and a sharp slowing in the world economy. The economic cost for the world economy would be greater if some countries resist fundamental exchange rate movements or if there is a rise in protectionism.
 
For Canada, the risks of weaker global demand beginning some time in 2007 would imply less demand for Canadian products, less buoyancy in commodity prices and, hence, less growth in business investment. A sharp depreciation of the US dollar against the Canadian dollar, as part of a broader currency adjustment, would further exacerbate the negative impact on the demand for Canadian-produced goods. Such weaker demand would have implications for the conduct of monetary policy.