The global economy has unfolded broadly as the Bank projected in July. The economic expansion in the United States is progressing at a gradual pace. Europe is in recession and recent indicators point to a continued contraction. In China and other major emerging economies, growth has slowed somewhat more than expected, though there are signs of stabilization around current growth rates. Notwithstanding the slowdown in global economic activity, prices for oil and other commodities produced in Canada have, on average, increased in recent months. Global financial conditions have improved, supported by aggressive policy actions of major central banks, but sentiment remains fragile.
 
In Canada, while global headwinds continue to restrain economic activity, domestic factors are supporting a moderate expansion. Following the recent period of below-potential growth, the economy is expected to pick up and return to full capacity by the end of 2013. The Bank continues to project that the expansion will be driven mainly by growth in consumption and business investment, reflecting very stimulative domestic financial conditions. Housing activity is expected to decline from historically high levels, while the household debt burden is expected to rise further before stabilizing by the end of the projection horizon. Canadian exports are projected to pick up gradually but remain below their pre-recession peak until the first half of 2014, reflecting weak foreign demand and ongoing competitiveness challenges. These challenges include the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar, which is being influenced by safe-haven flows and spillovers from global monetary policy.
 
After taking into account revisions to the National Accounts, the Bank projects that the economy will grow by 2.2 per cent in 2012, 2.3 per cent in 2013 and 2.4 per cent in 2014.
 
Core inflation has been lower than expected in recent months, reflecting somewhat softer prices across a wide range of goods and services. Core inflation is expected to increase gradually over coming quarters, reaching 2 per cent by the middle of 2013 as the economy gradually absorbs the current small degree of slack, the growth of labour compensation remains moderate and inflation expectations stay well anchored. Total CPI inflation has fallen noticeably below the 2 per cent target, as expected, and is projected to return to target by the end of 2013, somewhat later than previously anticipated.
 
The inflation outlook in Canada is subject to significant risks. The Bank's projection assumes that authorities in Europe are able to contain the ongoing crisis, and that the US fiscal cliff will be avoided. Imbalances in the Canadian household sector remain the biggest domestic risk. This risk is two-sided.
 
The three main upside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the possibility of higher global inflationary pressures, stronger Canadian exports and renewed momentum in Canadian residential investment.
 
The three main downside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the European crisis, weaker demand for Canadian exports and the possibility that growth in Canadian household spending could be weaker.
 
Overall, the Bank judges that the risks to the inflation outlook in Canada are roughly balanced over the projection period.
 
Reflecting all of these factors, on 23 October, the Bank decided to maintain the target for the overnight rate at 1 per cent. Over time, some modest withdrawal of monetary policy stimulus will likely be required, consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target. The timing and degree of any such withdrawal will be weighed carefully against global and domestic developments, including the evolution of imbalances in the household sector.
 
The global economy has unfolded broadly as the Bank projected in its July Monetary Policy Report. While the economic expansion in the United States is progressing at a gradual pace, Europe is in recession, and recent indicators point to continued contraction. In China and other major emerging economies, growth has slowed somewhat more than expected, though there are signs of stabilization around current growth rates. Notwithstanding the slowdown in global economic activity, prices for oil and other commodities produced by Canada have increased, on average, in recent months. Global financial conditions have improved since the last Report, supported by the aggressive policy actions of major central banks, particularly the US Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan. Overall sentiment, however, remains fragile.
 
Following 3.8 per cent growth in 2011, global economic growth is expected to slow to 3.0 per cent in 2012 and 3.1 per cent in 2013, before rising to 3.5 per cent in 2014. The Bank's base-case scenario continues to be predicated on the following two important assumptions: the crisis in the euro area will remain contained, and a severe tightening of US fiscal policy at the beginning of 2013, the so-called "fiscal cliff," will be avoided. The Bank's projections incorporate the impact on the global economy of these and other sources of uncertainty.
 
Underlying global inflationary pressures are expected to ease over the projection horizon, given the considerable excess capacity observed in many advanced economies. The recent increase in energy and food prices will, however, provide a short-term offset, particularly in emerging-market economies.
 
Global financial conditions have improved modestly since the last Report, supported by several significant central bank initiatives and reduced concerns about a serious near-term credit event. Tail risks in the euro area are perceived to have diminished significantly following the ECB's announcement of its Outright Monetary Transactions program, while the announcement by the US Federal Reserve of substantial additional monetary easing has provided further support for some risky assets.
 
The more positive market tone has been reflected in narrower credit spreads, strong corporate issuance and large gains in many equity markets. The extraordinary liquidity provided by central banks may also be pushing down measures of financial market volatility.
 
The OMT program, which allows the ECB to purchase government bonds in the secondary market, is designed to eliminate the risk of euro redenomination and improve the monetary policy transmission mechanism in the euro area. This action, coupled with other encouraging policy developments in the euro area, has lowered the probability of a severe crisis and has led to a reversal of some safe-haven flows.  As a result, sovereign yields in several peripheral euro-area countries have declined substantially. Bond yields in peripheral euro-area countries nevertheless continue to be elevated, and significant financial market strains remain. Notably, there are signs of increasing fragmentation of European financial markets, with reduced cross-border financial activity and an evident home bias in investment portfolios.
 
Short-term yields in some core European countries are near zero, signalling that investors are still wary and are willing to pay a premium to protect their investments. In addition, the most recent bank lending survey in the euro area suggests that, in the second quarter, banks continued to tighten credit standards on loans to enterprises and that they expected to tighten standards further in the third quarter for all categories of loans.
 
In the United States, the Federal Reserve has extended its forward guidance for exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate through to at least mid-2015. Moreover, in addition to completing the maturity extension program, the Federal Reserve will provide further policy accommodation by purchasing additional agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of US$40 billion per month. The Fed has indicated that it will continue this MBS purchase program (or undertake additional asset purchases) until there is a substantial improvement in the outlook for the US labour market in a context of price stability.
 
US credit spreads have continued to narrow recently, with the yields on both investment-grade and high-yield corporate bonds declining to near-record levels, supported by robust investor demand. Spreads in the MBS market have also tightened substantially following the Federal Reserve announcement.
 
The euro area is in recession. GDP contracted by 0.7 per cent in the second quarter of 2012, a slightly smaller decline than anticipated in the July Report. However, economic indicators suggest that the strained economic situation in peripheral economies continues to spread to the core countries. The euro-area composite Economic Sentiment Indicator and the composite Purchasing Managers' Indexes both fell to near 3-year lows, and the ESIs for France and Germany have continued to slide.
 
Euro-area activity is projected to contract further in the second half of 2012, and GDP is expected to decline by 0.5 per cent for the year as a whole. With ongoing bank deleveraging, fiscal austerity measures, tensions in financial markets and low confidence continuing to weigh on the outlook for the euro area, the Bank expects very modest growth of 0.4 and 1.0 per cent in 2013 and 2014, respectively. Domestic demand in the euro area is anticipated to remain extremely weak, with some offsetting support for economic activity provided by export growth. However, the level of euro-area GDP is projected to stay below its 2008 peak throughout the 2012-14 period.
 
Headline inflation in the euro area remained at 2.6 per cent in September, supported by increases in indirect taxes and administered prices in peripheral countries, as well as the recent run-up in energy prices. Inflation is expected to remain above 2 per cent throughout 2012 and to decline gradually to below 2 per cent over the projection horizon.
 
While the introduction of the OMT by the ECB provides time for reforms to be implemented, further substantive measures will be needed to continue to contain the crisis and put euro-area economies on a sustainable path. Fiscal and structural policy adjustments will take several more years to complete, and market confidence will be restored only gradually.
 
The US economic expansion is continuing at a gradual pace, consistent with the experience of other advanced countries that have undergone severe financial crises. GDP growth in 2012 is projected to be slightly higher than previously anticipated, owing to historical revisions for late 2011 that affect annual average growth for 2012 and more than offset the negative effects of the severe drought on farm output. Fiscal consolidation, weak external demand and ongoing household deleveraging will nevertheless continue to restrain growth. In 2013, growth is projected to accelerate, supported by a pickup in external demand, a gradual improvement in labour market conditions and the recent announcement of additional policy easing by the Federal Reserve.
 
Relative to the July Report, US GDP growth in 2013 and 2014 has been revised up to 2.3 per cent and 3.2 per cent, respectively, owing to a larger policy response by the Federal Reserve than was previously expected. These policy measures will support stronger growth over the projection horizon by lowering the cost of credit to consumers and businesses, boosting asset prices and wealth, and putting downward pressure on the US dollar, thus contributing to higher growth in consumption and both residential and non-residential investment than had been anticipated in July.
 
The Bank's base-case scenario assumes that the drag from fiscal consolidation will amount to roughly 1 percentage point in 2012 and 1.5 percentage points in both 2013 and 2014. However, a severe tightening of fiscal policy at the beginning of 2013 is built into current legislation, which, if fully implemented, could reduce US real GDP growth next year by approximately 4 percentage points. The outlook is therefore highly uncertain and is contingent on political willingness to address the impending fiscal cliff. There are signs that the uncertainty around the fiscal outlook, coupled with the fragile state of the European economy and other worrying external developments, has already begun to affect US economic activity, with firms deciding to delay spending on some investment projects.
 
Consumption expenditures are expected to grow at a relatively slow but steady pace over the projection horizon. Weak labour market conditions continue to restrain household income, with the level of employment still 4.5 million below its previous peak. While the unemployment rate has declined in recent months, partly reflecting a further drop in labour force participation, it remains elevated. On the positive side, household net worth is gradually being rebuilt, supported by gains in both equity and house prices. In addition, the household debt-to-income  ratio has returned to 2005 levels and the debt-service ratio has reached multi-year lows.
 
Residential investment has rebounded in recent quarters, albeit from a very depressed level. Although home-builder sentiment has improved significantly and the number of building permits has climbed above 800,000 for the first time since 2008, housing demand remains subdued. The significant overhang of unoccupied dwellings, as well as homes in the foreclosure pipeline, continues to restrain new construction and limit upward pressure on prices. The Bank expects that a gradual easing in lending conditions, improving labour market conditions and underlying demographic demand will support the recovery in residential construction over the projection horizon. The announcement by the US Federal Reserve that it will purchase mortgage-backed securities will also help in this regard.
 
The recovery in non-residential construction is expected to proceed at a modest pace, restrained by elevated vacancy rates and tight borrowing conditions. Growth in investment in equipment and software decelerated markedly in the first two quarters of 2012 and is projected to remain relatively weak in the short term, constrained in part by the uncertainty associated with the global economic outlook and the impending fiscal cliff. As these negative effects gradually dissipate and GDP growth picks up, growth in business investment is expected to rebound, supported by healthy corporate balance sheets. This rebound is slightly stronger than forecast in the July Report, owing to the additional monetary stimulus.
 
US export growth in 2012 has been affected by slowing external demand and the past appreciation of the US real effective exchange rate, but is projected to strengthen gradually starting in the second half of 2013 as global demand growth begins to recover.
 
Excess supply in the US economy is expected to remain significant until well beyond 2014, dampening underlying inflationary pressures. Consumer price inflation will increase in the short term, however, reflecting the rapid increase in gasoline prices in recent months and the impact of the rise in food prices associated with the drought that affected vast areas of US farmland. The additional policy easing by the Federal Reserve will also provide somewhat more support to inflation than previously anticipated.
 
Real GDP growth in Japan decelerated to 0.7 per cent in the second quarter of 2012 from 5.3 per cent in the first quarter. The sharp slowdown was in line with expectations at the time of the July Report and reflected a broad-based slowdown in domestic demand, as well as continued weakness in external demand, especially from Europe and China. The contribution from public investment was also lower in the second quarter; growth in this sector remained strong, however, owing to reconstruction efforts following the natural disasters of March 2011. Consumer price inflation in Japan remains slightly below zero.
 
Japan's real GDP growth is projected to average only about 1 per cent in 2013 and 2014. A strong yen, together with weak growth in foreign demand, is anticipated to weigh on the pace of economic activity in the short term, while a planned increase in the value-added tax on consumption and declining reconstruction-related spending are expected to dampen growth toward the end of the projection horizon.
 
Real GDP growth in China slowed further in the third quarter of 2012 to 7.4 per cent on a year-over-year basis. The ongoing slowdown, also reflected in weak industrial production data, is the result of continuing efforts by Chinese authorities to rein in an overheated property market, as well as reduced external demand, particularly from Europe.
 
China's economy is expected to grow at a pace of about 7.7 per cent over the projection horizon. This represents a slight pickup from the recent rate of growth, but is a somewhat weaker forecast than in the July Report. Government spending on infrastructure should provide some support to growth over the projection period, but likely to a more limited extent than the stimulus measures introduced during the previous slowdown. Near-term growth in exports is expected to be dampened by weak activity in a number of advanced economies before picking up in mid-2013. Some additional slowing in housing is anticipated, although there is evidence that the housing market has recently stabilized, following a significant deceleration in activity.
 
Inflationary pressures in China appear well contained, with consumer price inflation at only 1.9 per cent in September compared with 6.1 per cent a year ago. However, since food represents a large portion of household expenditures, rising world food prices caused by severe droughts in a number of major food-producing countries are expected to exert significant upward pressure on China's inflation in coming quarters. Although the People's Bank of China eased monetary policy earlier this year, higher inflation due to rising food prices may limit the scope for further easing. Significant monetary policy easing may also be constrained by the fear of exacerbating existing domestic imbalances, particularly in the housing sector.
 
Economic activity in several other large EMEs is also slowing in response to both external and domestic factors. After registering the lowest GDP growth since the financial crisis, activity in India appears to be weakening further, reflecting softer private consumption and investment. Recent indicators also suggest that GDP growth in Brazil will remain subdued in the second half of 2012. Owing to reduced near-term inflationary pressures, many EMEs have lowered their policy interest rates. As in China, however, further easing could be tempered by expected increases in food prices and still elevated credit growth. Economic growth in the other large EMEs is expected to pick up gradually in the second half of 2013 as a result of the recent policy easing and somewhat stronger export markets.
 
Prices for many commodities have increased since the July Report. A rise in crude oil prices and a rebound in base metal prices, both partly related to the announcement of new policy stimulus measures in several countries, account for much of the recent movement. Oil prices measured by the Brent crude benchmark are about 23 per cent higher than the trough reached at the end of June, boosted by temporary supply disruptions in the North Sea and tensions in the Middle East. In contrast, while higher relative to their July level, crude oil prices captured by the West Texas Intermediate benchmark have fallen in recent weeks, reflecting strong supply conditions in North America. The latest futures curves suggest that the spread between Brent crude oil prices and WTI prices will gradually narrow over the projection horizon, owing to some normalization of supply conditions. Relative to the July Report, futures curves also indicate that Brent and WTI oil prices will be about 10 per cent and 5 per cent higher, respectively, through 2014.
 
Natural gas prices in North America have also risen since the July Report but, at a little above US$3 per million Btu, are still low as new fracking technologies continue to drive an expansion of supply. Based on the latest futures curve, natural gas prices are projected to continue to rise through 2014, similar to expectations in July.
 
Prices for non-energy commodities are also higher, on average, than in July, and are projected to stay above the levels anticipated at the time of the last Report through 2014, although substantial variation has been observed across some commodity groups over the past few months. Base metal prices have increased sharply since mid-August, offsetting part of the significant decline in prices observed earlier in the year. These prices are expected to continue increasing, albeit at a slower pace, over the projection horizon. Prices for agricultural products have broadly stabilized since the July Report after a drought-related spike. While agricultural prices are expected to remain elevated through mid-2013, they are projected to decline thereafter as supply conditions improve. Prices for forestry products, after rising through August, have returned to the levels observed at the time of the July Report. Over the next two years, the prices of forestry products are expected to improve gradually, supported by the recovery of the US housing sector.
 
External demand for Canada's exports, as estimated by the Bank's foreign activity measure, remains modest.  The measure has recovered only 60 per cent of the decline recorded during the 2008-09 recession, owing largely to protracted weakness in the US housing sector. Despite the relatively subdued outlook for global economic growth, the foreign activity measure is projected to grow steadily over the next two years, reflecting a gradual recovery in the US housing market and an anticipated increase in the growth of US business investment once the uncertainty related to the fiscal cliff and the situation in Europe dissipates. Owing to the annual revisions to US data, the level of the foreign activity measure is slightly lower than previously expected in the second quarter of 2012. However, upward revisions to the Bank's outlook for the US economy imply stronger growth in the foreign activity measure over the projection horizon. The foreign activity measure is expected to surpass its pre-recession level during the second half of 2013.
 
The Bank of Canada's commodity price index has increased by approximately 6 per cent since July, contributing to an improvement in Canada's terms of trade. Prices received by Canadian producers of heavy crude oil, Western Canada Select , are up 13 per cent, owing in part to the resolution of pipeline and refinery outages that had previously weighed on prices. As a result, the spread between WCS and WTI has narrowed significantly. The BCPI is anticipated to remain relatively stable. A projected rise in natural gas prices and the continued recovery in base metal prices are expected to be offset by a gradual decrease in crude oil prices and some easing in agricultural prices.
 
The Canadian dollar has averaged 101 cents US since the July Report, higher than the 98 cents US assumed in July, and is assumed to average 101 cents US over the projection horizon.
 
While global headwinds continue to restrain Canadian economic activity, domestic factors are supporting a moderate expansion. Following the recent period of below-potential growth, the Bank expects the economy to pick up in coming quarters, returning to full capacity by the end of 2013. The Bank continues to anticipate that the expansion will be driven mainly by growth in consumption and business investment, reflecting very stimulative domestic financial conditions. Housing activity is expected to decline from historically high levels, and household debt ratios are expected to rise further before stabilizing by the end of the projection horizon. Canadian exports are projected to pick up gradually but remain below their pre-recession peak until the first half of 2014, reflecting the weak level of foreign demand and ongoing competitiveness challenges. These challenges include the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar, which is being influenced by safe-haven flows and spillovers from global monetary policy.
 
Core inflation has been lower than expected in recent months, reflecting somewhat softer prices across a wide range of goods and services. Core inflation is expected to increase gradually over coming quarters, reaching 2 per cent by the middle of 2013 as the current small degree of slack in the economy is gradually absorbed, the growth of labour compensation stays moderate and inflation expectations remain well anchored. Total CPI inflation has fallen noticeably below the 2 per cent target, as expected, and is projected to return to target by the end of 2013, somewhat later than previously anticipated.
 
In a context of somewhat improved global financial conditions, the supply and price of credit for businesses and households in Canada remain very stimulative, providing important ongoing support to the economic expansion.
 
Canadian financial markets have benefited from the modest reduction in global risk aversion in recent months. The S&P/TSX Composite Index has risen by roughly 8 per cent since the July Report, and volatility has diminished. Credit spreads on Canadian corporate bonds have continued to narrow, more than offsetting the slight increase in Canadian government bond yields. As a result, all-in corporate bond yields have fallen to record lows, and the volume of corporate bond issuance has remained robust.
 
Canadian banks continue to be well positioned to lend, with ready access to low-cost funding across the term structure in both Canadian and foreign currencies, on both a relative and absolute basis. Responses to the Bank's latest Senior Loan Officer Survey and the balance of opinion of Canadian firms surveyed in the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey both suggest some further easing in business lending conditions in recent months, extending a period of almost uninterrupted easing since late 2009.
 
With financing conditions for Canadian firms remaining highly favourable, overall business credit has expanded in recent months at a rate above its historical average. However, the demand for credit stemming from the solid growth in business investment continues to be tempered by the historically high cash position of non-financial firms.
 
Household credit continues to be readily available at near-record low rates. Growth in household credit has remained relatively stable at around 5.5 per cent since the beginning of the year, a pace below the historical average, following an extended period of rapid growth that led to a substantial buildup in household debt. Regulatory measures implemented in recent months are expected to moderate the growth of household credit somewhat. Nevertheless, the household debt-to-income ratio is expected to continue to rise before stabilizing by the end of the projection horizon.
 
While growth in the narrow monetary aggregates remains moderate compared with the unusually rapid pace observed in late 2011, it has edged up in recent months, suggesting a slightly greater degree of liquidity preference, particularly among companies. Growth in the broad monetary aggregates has also picked up from earlier in the year, although it continues to be consistent with relatively subdued inflationary pressures ahead.
 
The Bank's projection for the growth of potential output in Canada over the 2012-14 period is unchanged from the projection in the October 2011 Report. Potential output growth is expected to increase from 2.0 per cent in 2012 to 2.2 per cent in 2014. The projection horizon has now been extended to 2015, when the growth of potential output is expected to be 2.1 per cent. As a result of the recovery in investment spending, as well as efficiency gains, trend productivity is projected to improve as Canadian firms strive to adopt best practices in the face of competitive pressures. At the same time, demographic forces will continue to reduce the trend rate of labour input growth.
 
The Canadian economy continues to operate with a small amount of spare capacity. While real GDP growth of 1.9 per cent in the second quarter was broadly in line with the growth of potential output, as expected, historical revisions to the National Accounts suggest slightly less economic slack in Canada through 2011 and early 2012 than previously estimated. However, real GDP growth is estimated to have been weaker than anticipated at around 1.0 per cent in the third quarter, partly reflecting the impact on Canadian exports of transitory disruptions in the energy sector. Consistent with these dynamics, the Bank's conventional measure of the output gap widened slightly to -0.7 per cent in the third quarter.
 
Taken together, other indicators of pressures on capacity also point to the persistence of a small degree of slack in the Canadian economy. Responses to the Bank's Business Outlook Survey in recent quarters have shown that the proportion of firms that would have difficulty meeting an unexpected increase in demand has stayed close to its historical average, and while the proportion of firms reporting labour shortages has edged up, it is still slightly below its historical average. Despite solid gains in employment, the unemployment rate has been broadly steady over the past year, at a level consistent with a modest degree of slack in the economy. Moreover, both the duration of unemployment and the proportion of involuntary  part-time workers continue to be elevated.
 
On balance, the Bank judges that the economy was operating at roughly two-thirds of a per cent below its production capacity in the third quarter of 2012, a slightly larger degree of slack than expected in July.
 
The Bank expects growth in the Canadian economy to pick up in coming quarters to a somewhat faster pace than that of its production potential. On an average annual basis, real GDP growth is forecast to increase from 2.2 per cent in 2012 to 2.3 per cent in 2013 and 2.4 per cent in 2014. Although available indicators suggest that growth in the third quarter of this year was weaker than expected, the annual growth rate for 2012 is higher than in the July Report, owing largely to revisions that show stronger growth in the third and fourth quarters of 2011 than previously estimated.  The outlook for growth is broadly similar to that expected in the July Report.
 
The Bank continues to anticipate that consumption and business fixed investment will be the primary drivers of real GDP growth over the projection horizon, supported by accommodative domestic financial conditions. The pickup in growth from its trough in the third quarter of this year is expected to be driven primarily by a modest increase in net exports. This balances ongoing competitiveness challenges with the projected improvement in the growth of foreign activity, which is expected to pick up from an average rate of 3.5 per cent over the second and third quarters of 2012 to roughly 7 per cent over the projection horizon. The outlook for final domestic demand is slightly weaker than in the July Report, although the changes are relatively small. While the recent further easing in financial conditions and the favourable effects of higher terms of trade on Canadian incomes and wealth should provide additional support to domestic demand, recent indicators suggest slightly less momentum in residential and business fixed investment than previously projected.
 
Growth in household spending has been moderate. Growth in consumption, which was weak through the first half of 2012, is estimated to have picked up in the third quarter. Housing investment declined in the second and third quarters, following strong gains over the previous three quarters. Nonetheless, with signs of overbuilding, the level of housing investment still remains near historical highs.
 
It is possible that the elevated level of household debt is beginning to induce a more cautious attitude among Canadian households. As a result, the Bank's outlook for growth in household spending is little changed from the July Report, despite the supportive impact of improved financial conditions and higher terms of trade in recent months. Growth in consumption is thus expected to be moderate over the projection horizon, at a rate slightly below that of disposable income, resulting in a small increase in the personal savings rate. Residential investment is projected to contract, with its share of the overall economy declining from the current elevated level. In this regard, the measures implemented in recent months by federal authorities are expected to contribute to a more sustainable housing market in Canada.
 
The comprehensive revisions to the System of National Accounts did not alter the recent broad profile of household spending. There are a few note-worthy adjustments, however. The household savings rate is now estimated to have been higher in recent years than previously reported, although it is generally lower than previously estimated prior to 2006. In addition, household net worth is now estimated to be higher than previously reported, showing a stronger recovery since the recession. Finally, the household debt-to-income  ratio is now estimated to be 161 per cent as of the second quarter of 2012, a more elevated level than previously thought.
 
The Bank continues to forecast solid growth in business fixed investment over the projection horizon. This forecast reflects the strong financial positions of Canadian firms, favourable credit conditions, high commodity prices and the strong Canadian dollar, as well as the impetus to improve productivity amid heightened pressures to become more competitive. Although these factors have been marginally more supportive to the outlook for capital spending in recent months, the projected growth profile for business fixed investment is somewhat less robust than in the July Report. This is mainly because global economic uncertainty appears to be having a larger impact on the capital spending plans of Canadian businesses, as reflected in the less-positive responses to the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey. Moreover, many firms reported that following the recent completion of significant projects, they would now focus on achieving a more intensive use of existing capital.
 
Government spending is expected to contribute modestly to real GDP growth over the projection horizon. As in the July base-case scenario, these contributions are projected to be considerably weaker than has been typical historically, in line with the plans of federal and provincial governments to consolidate spending.
 
The recovery in net exports is expected to remain weak. Growth in Canada's exports is projected to pick up but remain relatively moderate despite stronger growth in foreign activity, owing to ongoing competitiveness challenges, including the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar. As a result, the level of Canada's exports is not forecast to regain its pre-recession peak until the first half of 2014. In contrast, the level of imports has already returned to its pre-recession peak. Partly as a result, Canada's current account balance has declined from a surplus before the recession to a deficit of around 4 per cent of GDP. This sizable current account deficit, which has been somewhat larger in recent quarters than previously estimated, is projected to diminish gradually over the forecast horizon.
 
The projected growth in exports is slightly stronger than in the July Report, with the higher assumed value of the Canadian dollar only partly offsetting the stronger-than-anticipated growth profile for US business investment and the somewhat firmer recovery from low levels of US demand for housing and automobiles. The projected growth in imports is similar to July, despite the higher assumed value for the Canadian dollar, reflecting the marginally weaker outlook for domestic demand. As a result, the projected contribution to real GDP growth from net exports is slightly higher than in the July Report, although it remains relatively modest.
 
Given the above projection for real GDP, the Canadian economy is expected to gradually absorb the currently small amount of slack in coming quarters, reaching full capacity by the end of 2013, slightly later than in the July Report.
 
Core CPI inflation averaged 1.5 per cent in the third quarter, down from an average of 2.0 per cent in the first half of the year. Alternative measures of core inflation have also fallen below 2 per cent in recent months. The decline in core CPI inflation has been greater than anticipated, reflecting somewhat softer prices across a wide range of goods and services. In contrast, gasoline prices have been firmer than expected in recent months, reflecting both higher world prices for crude oil and higher margins. As a result, total CPI inflation was in line with the Bank's expectations at 1.2 per cent in the third quarter, down from 1.6 per cent in the second quarter and 2.4 per cent in the first quarter.
 
Inflation expectations remain well anchored. The October Consensus Economics forecasts for total CPI inflation in 2012 and 2013 were 1.8 per cent and 1.9 per cent, respectively. As reported in the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey, almost all firms surveyed continue to expect average inflation over the next two years to remain within the 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range. Market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations also continue to be consistent with the 2 per cent inflation-control target.
 
Core inflation is expected to remain subdued in the near term before increasing gradually in coming quarters to reach 2 per cent by the middle of 2013, as the economy gradually absorbs the current small degree of slack and inflation expectations remain well anchored. In addition, growth in labour compensation is expected to stay moderate, consistent with recent trends in wage growth, thus contributing to the projected stability in inflation. As previously assumed, the indirect effects associated with the restoration of the provincial sales tax in British Columbia are expected to have a minor effect on core inflation over the projection horizon.
 
This projection for core inflation is weaker than in the July Report. Similarly, total CPI inflation is expected to remain below 2 per cent for a somewhat longer period than previously anticipated, converging to the target by the end of 2013. In addition to the lower profile for core inflation, this reflects a larger expected decline in gasoline prices from current elevated levels over the bulk of the projection horizon.
 
This projection includes a gradual reduction in monetary stimulus over the projection horizon, consistent with achieving the inflation target.
 
The uncertainty surrounding the Bank's inflation projection is illustrated using fan charts. Chart 39 and Chart 40 depict the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the fourth quarter of 2012 to the end of 2014.
 
The inflation outlook in Canada is subject to significant risks. In particular, the Bank's projection assumes that authorities in Europe are able to contain the ongoing crisis, and that the US fiscal cliff will be avoided. Imbalances in the Canadian household sector remain the biggest domestic risk. This risk is two-sided.
 
The three main upside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the possibility of higher global inflationary pressures, stronger Canadian exports and renewed momentum in Canadian residential investment.
 
Global inflationary pressures could be more persistent than currently projected if potential output in advanced economies is lower than anticipated or if the substantial, additional monetary policy stimulus provided by major central banks boosts prices more than expected.
 
Growth in Canadian exports could be stronger than expected if exporters improve their competitiveness more rapidly than currently assumed or if output growth in the United States is stronger than projected.
 
While residential investment in Canada has softened recently after reaching record-high levels, it could regain momentum, thereby reinforcing existing imbalances.
 
The three main downside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the European crisis, weaker demand for Canadian exports and the possibility that growth in Canadian household spending could be weaker.
 
Failure to contain the crisis in Europe is the most serious risk facing the global and Canadian economies. The effects on Canada through financial, confidence and trade channels would be substantial, given the size and importance of the euro area to the global economy.
 
Demand for Canadian exports could be weaker than expected if the authorities in the United States do not smooth the path of fiscal consolidation to avoid the fiscal cliff, if the slowdown in emerging-market economies is greater than expected, or if unconventional policy measures undertaken by foreign authorities have an outsized effect on exchange rates.
 
Continuing high household debt levels in Canada could lead to a sharper-than-expected deceleration in household spending. Relatedly, if there were a sudden weakening in the Canadian housing sector, it could have sizable spillover effects on other areas of the economy.
 
Overall, the Bank judges that the risks to the inflation outlook in Canada are roughly balanced over the projection period.