During the past six months, global economic uncertainties have intensified, largely as a result of developments in emerging-market economies. The task for the Bank of Canada, as for monetary authorities in other industrial countries, has been twofold: to assess the implications of those developments for domestic economic activity and inflation, and thus for the stance of policy; and to address the volatility and nervousness in financial markets.
 
In our May Monetary Policy Report, we noted that a high degree of uncertainty existed because of the international environment. On the one hand, the adverse developments in Asia, particularly in Japan, were increasingly weighing on the Canadian economy. On the other hand, a buoyant US economy was providing strong support for Canadian exports. In these circumstances, it was anticipated that the volatility in interest rates and exchange rates could be exacerbated. This in turn would likely cause monetary conditions to fluctuate over a relatively wide range.
 
In late summer, the turbulence in global markets intensified as a result of developments in Russia, particularly the decision by the Russian authorities to unilaterally declare a debt moratorium. This unanticipated action reverberated through financial markets around the globe. Many emerging-market economies were hit by large capital outflows and a sharp widening of interest rate spreads as nervous investors sought a safe haven, primarily in US and European government bond markets. Similarly, there was a widening of spreads between private sector bonds and government bonds and a reduction in liquidity in markets for more risky instruments.
 
The past six months have thus been a period of coping with a high degree of uncertainty and volatility in global financial markets and of assessing the economic consequences of international developments for Canada. This Report reviews the actions taken by the Bank of Canada. It also gives our current assessment of the domestic and international factors at play, focusing on their implications for the economy and for future inflation relative to the Bank's inflation-control target range.
 
Given current international uncertainties, we must stress the highly conditional nature of the outlook. However, it is also important not to lose sight of the positive elements supporting continued expansion of the Canadian economy - a declining public sector debt-to-GDP ratio, restructuring of the private sector, and low and stable inflation.
 
Over the past six months, core inflation (CPI excluding food, energy, and the effect of changes in indirect taxes) has remained near the bottom of the Bank's inflation-control target range. Inflation and the target range
 
The 12-month rate of increase in the core CPI was 1.2 per cent in September, unchanged from March and slightly lower than our expectations. Two other statistical measures of the trend rate of inflation (CPIX and CPIW) have remained relatively stable at about the same level as core inflation.
 
The fall in the external value of the Canadian dollar over the past year has pushed up prices in certain sectors. Although the depreciation of the Canadian dollar has contributed to a marked rise in the import prices of many non-energy consumer goods and services, only part of this effect has passed through to consumer prices, given the typical lags in this process. The depreciation has also contributed to increased demand for domestically produced goods and services and, hence, to price increases for such items as hotel accommodation. Overall, we estimate that the price-level effects of the depreciation account for 0.4 percentage points of September's core inflation rate. Another factor that may be putting upward pressure on core inflation is an expectation that, over the longer term, inflation will be higher than the current low levels.
 
Other developments have acted to offset some of these influences on core inflation. Most importantly, excess supply in the economy and pressures from Asian suppliers have continued to restrain price increases. Competition in the retail sector has remained particularly intense, although the considerable number of store closures in the first half of 1998 has reduced excess retail capacity. In the long-distance telephone market, deregulation has increased competition and reduced rates. In addition, computer prices have been falling at an accelerated rate owing to technological change, lower component costs due to currency depreciations in Asia, and excess world capacity in the microchip industry.
 
For the total CPI, the 12-month rate of increase was 0.7 per cent in September, compared with 0.9 per cent last March. Further reductions in crude oil prices caused retail energy prices to decline, which in turn held back the overall rise in total CPI inflation.
 
Economy-wide, the price level has remained virtually unchanged. Year-over-year inflation based on the chain price index for GDP - which is characterized by weights that adjust to shifts in the composition of spending - was barely positive in the second quarter of 1998. Moderate price increases for both consumer products and business fixed investment goods were offset by continuing reductions in the prices of commodity exports.
 
The declines in world commodity prices reflected both demand and supply factors. Worldwide demand for commodities has fallen, primarily as a result of developments in Asia. Unusually large grain harvests and increased exports of metals, crude oil, and pulp from resource-rich countries were largely responsible for increased commodity supplies. There were also concerns that certain resource-rich countries that were having financial difficulties, such as Russia, might export more in the future.
 
At the manufacturing level, the aggregate industrial product price index has changed little on a year-over-year basis. Prices of many finished exports with contracts in US dollars, such as motor vehicles, increased appreciably following the depreciation of the Canadian dollar against the US dollar. However, this has been largely offset by lower prices for most manufactured intermediate goods, which reflect weak commodity prices.
 
Following robust growth during 1997, Canada's economic expansion slowed in the first half of 1998, as the effects of developments in Asia began to show through, particularly in the resource sector. In the first half of this year, real GDP rose at an annual rate of about 2.5 per cent. Information to date suggests that economic growth slowed somewhat further in the third quarter. The recovery from strikes in the fourth quarter of 1997 boosted activity in early 1998, while labour disruptions in the automotive, pulp and paper, housing, airline, and education sectors cut activity between June and September. However, when the first three quarters of 1998 are taken as a whole, these factors had little effect on growth.
 
Export volumes grew briskly in the first half of 1998 but eased from the vigorous pace of 1997. US demand for machinery and equipment and intermediate goods continued to increase. However, exports of commodities (especially forest products) to Japan and other East Asian countries declined considerably. Exports of automotive products also fell sharply in June and July, mainly because of temporary shutdowns at General Motors, following labour disruptions at two US parts plants. By early August, production had returned to normal.
 
Household expenditures increased strongly in the first half of 1998, though at a slightly lower rate than in 1997. Spending on items other than durable goods and housing continued to expand at a fairly robust pace, moving the savings rate to a record post-war low. In the first quarter of 1998, further substantial employment gains (especially in paid, full-time jobs) helped keep consumer confidence relatively high. Subsequently, employment growth eased, and there were renewed concerns over job prospects towards mid-year. New residential construction in the second quarter was also slowed by a series of strikes in the Toronto area. With those strikes largely settled by early August, housing starts recovered towards pre-strike levels.
 
Business spending on capital goods grew less than last year, but was still substantial in the first half of 1998. Expenditures on structures rose at a faster rate than in 1997, while those on machinery and equipment slowed.
 
Inventory investment eased considerably, mainly in the wholesale and retail trade sectors. Department stores scaled back inventory levels to correct imbalances and as part of store closures.
 
The slowdown in the demand for import-intensive items, such as machinery and equipment and motor vehicles, contributed to a pronounced reduction in the growth of import volumes.
 
The current account deficit narrowed marginally to just under 2 per cent of GDP at mid-year. An improvement in the real trade balance was largely offset by a further deterioration in the terms of trade arising from the continuing decline in commodity prices.
 
Overall, aggregate demand grew at about the same rate as the economy's capacity to produce in the first half of 1998. As a result, Bank staff estimate that the output gap - the amount of excess supply in the economy as a percentage of capacity output - was essentially unchanged from the end of 1997. Such estimates, it should be stressed, are highly imprecise and need to be viewed as points within a wide band of confidence in a statistical sense. Staff estimate that there is a 50 per cent probability that the output gap in the second quarter of 1998 was between and 2 per cent.
 
Wages, the largest component of the total costs of producing goods and services, once again rose at a moderate pace. Annual wage settlements in the unionized private sector averaged 1.5 per cent in the first half of 1998, compared with 1.7 per cent in the second half of 1997. Wage settlements in the public sector were a little higher, averaging 1.8 per cent in the first half of 1998. Based on these and other measures, the underlying wage increase in the total economy is estimated to have been close to 2 per cent. This is confirmed by wage data from Statistics Canada's Labour Force Information. For example, the year-over-year increase in the average hourly wage, excluding overtime, for permanent workers was 2.0 per cent in the third quarter of 1998.
 
Productivity growth moderated in the first half of 1998, mainly because of the slowdown in output growth. Even so, the year-over-year rise in unit labour costs remained very low because of moderate growth in labour income per person-hour. The growth of labour income per person-hour was unusually high in early 1997 because of the timing of irregular bonus payments.
 
Over the past six months, the conduct of monetary policy has been influenced by: the implications for the Canadian economy of the slowdown in world economic activity and the associated decline in commodity prices; intensified turbulence and uncertainty in global financial markets; the decline of the Canadian dollar in the context of these developments; and the effect of these factors on the outlook for inflation in Canada.
 
The crisis that began in Southeast Asia in 1997 spread to South Korea and worsened the problems already afflicting Japan, the world's second-largest economy. This summer, renewed political and economic turmoil in Russia further jolted confidence. Subsequently, some Latin American economies came under financial pressure. While there was an element of contagion in this chain of events, it is also the case that serious weaknesses in the emerging-market economies, particularly in their banking systems, played an important role. In several of these countries, as well as in Japan, it is not yet clear how quickly the necessary far-reaching reforms will be implemented.
 
The acute uncertainties have resulted in volatile prices for all types of financial assets around the world. A flight to quality has favoured government bond markets in the G-10 countries, while raising the premiums for credit risk in other markets. Thus, interest rates in emerging markets have risen dramatically, and yield spreads between corporate and government bonds in the United States and Canada have widened appreciably.
 
These developments have also directly affected the Canadian dollar. Because Canada's trade depends more on resources than that of our major trading partners, there was downward pressure on the Canadian dollar as commodity prices continued to fall. From May through the first weeks of August, the dollar declined fairly steadily, for a cumulative depreciation of about 4 per cent on the G-10 index and of more than 5 per cent against the US dollar. In the second half of August, the pace of decline picked up, and it became increasingly difficult for the market to see where the currency might eventually settle. Extrapolative expectations began to take hold, especially as the value of the Canadian dollar in terms of the US dollar broke new lows day after day.
 
The increased risk premiums that emerged in Canadian interest rates became increasingly worrisome. Long-term interest rates were rising at a time when comparable rates in the United States were falling. Consequently, the long-term yield differential against the United States, which had been negative for a year, turned positive, and approached 50 basis points towards the end of August. Also, short-term interest rates rose (the 90-day commercial paper rate nearing 5 per cent), even though the Bank of Canada was holding the band for the overnight interest rate at 4.5 to 5.0 per cent.
 
The intensification of the decline in the Canadian dollar and the rise in Canadian medium - and long-term interest rates signalled an undermining of the confidence of holders of Canadian dollar financial instruments. The Bank initially intervened heavily in the foreign exchange market, and then on 27 August raised the
 
International financial markets remained nervous, and considerable volatility continued in global and Canadian financial markets. However, the Canadian dollar rallied after the Bank Rate increase, and the medium - and long-term yield spread vis-à-vis the United States narrowed. Indeed, as US treasury yields continued to decline, Canadian medium - and long-term rates fell to new lows. In turn, this allowed mortgage lenders to reduce their rates. The improvement in Canadian financial markets stemmed largely from the improved confidence engendered by the Bank Rate increase and growing expectations of lower US rates. When the Federal Reserve lowered its target federal funds rate by of a percentage point on 29 September, the Bank of Canada followed suit, reducing the Bank Rate to 5 per cent. The Federal Reserve again reduced the federal funds rate by of a percentage point on 15 October. The next day the Bank lowered the Bank Rate by a similar amount, to 5 per cent.
 
In summary, heightened uncertainties and a slowing economy over the past six months have affected the conduct of monetary policy in two important respects. First, the Bank has had to place particular emphasis on calming financial markets, so that participants could focus on economic fundamentals, thus helping to restore confidence. Second, as anticipated in the May Report, monetary conditions have fluctuated widely but, with the sizable decline in the dollar over the period, have, on balance, eased considerably.
 
When analyzing the outlook for inflation over the next two years, the Bank pays particular attention to the main factors that influence aggregate excess supply or demand, both current and projected. It also examines measures of inflation expectations and the pace of monetary expansion. When undertaking its analysis of economic prospects, the Bank is well aware of the uncertainty inevitably associated with its projections. It therefore also considers projections by other organizations, as well as alternative scenarios that assess the implications of important risks to the assumptions underlying the outlook.
 
The situation in various Asian economies and recent developments in other emerging-market economies (such as Russia and some Latin American countries) have resulted in a downward revision to estimates of global economic growth this year and next. However, growth is expected to be reasonably well sustained in North America, continental Europe, and the United Kingdom, given the underlying momentum in domestic demand in these economies. Among the G-7 countries, Japan is the main exception, reflecting weakness in both macroeconomic conditions and in the banking sector. Indeed, most of the downward revision to economic growth among industrial countries in the latest World Economic Outlook of the International Monetary Fund is the result of a much weaker outlook for Japan.
 
In the United States, the pace of economic expansion once again exceeded the growth in potential output during the first half of 1998. However, the rate of increase in real GDP is expected to ease as a result of the international economic slowdown and the fallout from financial market nervousness.
 
US core inflation (which excludes food and energy prices) has remained between 2 and 2.5 per cent. It is expected to change little over the next year, since the past appreciation of the US dollar and declines in commodity prices should offset any upward pressures arising from excess demand in labour markets.
 
In response to the economic consequences of international developments, unsettled conditions in financial markets generally, as well as a concern about credit availability resulting from cautious behaviour by lenders, the Federal Reserve lowered short-term interest rates in late September and again in mid-October. In the context of contained inflation, these actions are designed to sustain economic growth in the United States. Financial markets have built in expectations of further interest rate cuts.
 
Although the pace of recovery in the major European countries, particularly Germany, appears to have moderated around mid-year, economic growth is expected to be well sustained through the end of 1999. In the United Kingdom, where capacity constraints have been a concern, the economic expansion has begun to slow. In response to domestic developments and unsettled international financial markets, the Bank of England lowered its official rate by 25 basis points to 7 per cent on 8 October.
 
The Japanese economy contracted substantially during the first half of 1998. Further contraction is anticipated in the second half of the year, given worsening labour market conditions, falling domestic and foreign demand, and increasingly difficult financing conditions for firms. On the assumptions that monetary conditions will remain accommodative, that progress will be made on banking sector reform, and that additional fiscal policy stimulus will be undertaken, a modest recovery is expected in Japan in 1999.
 
Excess commodity supplies worldwide should gradually diminish. Thus, world commodity prices are expected to begin a gradual recovery next year.
 
Turning to Canada, we note that developments in Japan and in many of the emerging economies, together with the anticipated slowdown in the growth of the US economy, will tend to restrain the growth of Canadian exports over the next year. As well, Canadian shipments of commodities from high-cost sites may be further cut back until commodity prices recover significantly. Overall, however, total export volumes should continue to expand because of improved Canadian competitiveness, arising from the recent currency depreciation and from Canada's good price and cost performance relative to its trading partners. Exports of automotive products have already recovered, following the end of labour disruptions that had adversely affected operations at General Motors' Canadian facilities.
 
Canada's improved competitiveness is also expected to lead to more switching by Canadian business and consumers from foreign to domestic products, resulting in a further decrease in the growth of imports.
 
The growth of business investment is expected to slow through to the end of 1999, with the extent of the slowdown a function of the state of business confidence. A reduction in cash flow arising from the downturn in commodity prices will likely cause resource-based firms to spend less. Capital spending on electrical utilities in eastern Canada is also likely to fall back after being raised temporarily this year by the rebuilding of electrical transmission and distribution networks following last winter's ice storm. Inventory investment may also be reduced further in 1999 as some firms correct stock imbalances.
 
The effects of international developments are also evident in the labour market and in the recent measures of consumer confidence. While total employment has continued to expand, job gains have been concentrated in the service sector and in part-time employment, with jobs in the primary sector and in related manufacturing processing down sharply. These developments in the labour market, together with the recent financial market turmoil, have led to a decline in consumer confidence. If confidence does not recover quickly, an expected slowdown in household demand would likely persist through the balance of this year and well into 1999.
 
The latest consensus among private sector forecasters for the growth of real GDP (on an annual average basis) is 2.9 per cent this year and 2.2 per cent in 1999.In June, the consensus forecast was 3.4 per cent and 2.8 per cent for 1998 and 1999, respectively. As already noted, it is important to stress the conditional nature of economic projections at this time because of the degree of international uncertainty. On the assumption that domestic demand in the United States and in Europe remains on an expansionary track (as is generally anticipated), the Bank would expect GDP growth to be within a range around the consensus rate of just under 3 per cent this year. For 1999, there are two key uncertainties - volatility in global financial markets and the policy thrust in Japan. With progress expected to be made on both these fronts, the Bank sees growth in Canada next year in the range of 2 to 3 per cent. The latest IMF and OECD projections for economic growth in Canada next year are just above the lower end of this range. Projections at the upper end of the range depend primarily on a stronger response of net exports (i.e., higher exports and lower imports) to current levels of competitiveness than incorporated in most private sector forecasts.
 
The depreciation of the Canadian dollar against the US dollar should continue to put upward pressure on the prices of many imported goods and services over the next year or so. Price discounting might decrease over the next year and a half, as restructuring results in less excess capacity in the retail sector. At the same time, currency depreciations and weak economic conditions in several Asian countries may lead to greater price cutting on items such as clothing and durable goods, as retailers take advantage of cheaper foreign sources of supply. On balance, these transitory factors should put slight upward pressure on core inflation through 1999.
 
For the total CPI, exchange rate effects on food prices are expected to put upward pressure on the year-over-year rate of increase through the fall and winter of 1998-99.
 
Wage increases are likely to be moderate over the remainder of 1998 and through 1999, owing to both low price inflation and continued excess supply in the labour market. To the extent that productivity gains continue to be comparatively modest, the rate of increase in unit labour costs may rise slightly but should remain low.
 
Expectations of inflation are influenced both by recent developments in inflation and by the credibility of the Bank's inflation-control strategy. In the regular survey reported in the Conference Board's September Index of Business Confidence, 82 per cent of respondents (compared with 86 per cent in the March 1998 survey) expected inflation to be 2 per cent or less over the near term. The average private sector forecast for CPI inflation is 1.2 per cent this year and 1.6 per cent in 1999. Longer-term inflation forecasts, as reported by Consensus Economics Inc., also continue to be slightly below the midpoint of the inflation-control target range.
 
The differential between the yield on conventional bonds and Real Return Bonds has declined further. While this differential is affected by market liquidity and portfolio preferences, its steady decline to less than 1 per cent is evidence that investors are increasingly confident that inflation will remain low over the long run.
 
M1 growth has moderated. This is attributable in part to the rise in short-term interest rates since mid-1997. However, evolving structural factors have continued to influence M1 developments over time. The distinction between transactions balances included in M1 and other deposits has become less marked since the phasing-out of reserve requirements. This has permitted a shift back to current accounts, which now pay market-related rates of interest on tiered balances. At the same time, other innovations such as debit cards, ATMs, and telephone or personal-computer banking allow non-M1 accounts to be accessed more easily for transactions purposes, which may be reducing M1 balances.
 
Real M1 (adjusted for inflation) has been a good leading indicator for output, and recent research suggests that M1 might also help predict longer-term developments in price levels. Its recent growth suggests that output should continue to grow at a rate near potential and that inflation will remain inside the target range, although the innovations affecting M1, discussed in the preceding paragraph, make these projections more uncertain than before. Over the longer run, M1 is expected to slow considerably from its recent growth rates, unless there are further significant structural developments that would make M1 balances more attractive.
 
Broad money has been an indicator of short-term movements in output and the core CPI. Given the enormous shift from deposits to mutual funds in the 1990s, it is probably most informative for this purpose to look at the very broad aggregate M2++, which includes all mutual funds sold in Canada. (The adjusted M2+ aggregate includes only those funds sponsored by the deposit-taking institutions.) M2++ has been growing fairly steadily at a rate of about 8 per cent, which appears consistent with continued low inflation.
 
Three factors should contribute to some further modest increase in core inflation to the end of 1999. First, longer-term inflation expectations are somewhat above actual inflation. Second, some of the downward pressure on prices arising from intense competition in the retail sector should ease over the period. Finally, the recent depreciation of the Canadian dollar against the US dollar will tend to raise prices.
 
Several influences, however, will work to keep core inflation below the 2 per cent midpoint of the target range: slack in product and labour markets; low increases in unit labour costs; and reductions in the price of imports from Japan and various emerging-market economies in Asia.
 
In summary, the Bank expects core inflation to rise to about 1 per cent at the end of 1998 and then to be fairly steady in a range between 1 and 1 per cent over the course of 1999.
 
Over the past six months, economic projections for Canada have been lowered significantly because of the adverse consequences of international developments. Moreover, the ongoing uncertainties associated with these developments have placed a wider-than-usual confidence band around all projections.
 
Based on a view of sustained domestic demand in the United States and accommodative monetary conditions in Canada, the Bank expects that both external and domestic demand will continue to contribute to an expanding Canadian economy over the next year. However, given the importance of financial stability for underpinning household and business confidence, the extent to which growth will take up slack over this period will depend on how quickly international and domestic financial markets stabilize.
 
An important consideration for the Bank over the near term will therefore be to help preserve confidence among investors in Canadian financial markets.
 
Over the medium term, the fundamental focus of monetary policy remains on keeping the trend of inflation inside the Bank's target range of 1 to 3 per cent. As described in the Report, we expect inflation over the period to the end of 1999 to remain in the lower half of the target range.