Global economic growth continues to strengthen and broaden across countries and regions. The US economy is expanding at a moderate pace, and there are signs of a more consistent pickup in activity across the euro area. Growth has resumed in some emerging-market economies that had been in recession. Both global trade and investment growth have firmed, reflecting the more synchronous expansion worldwide and the bottoming-out of the effects of the oil price shock. Global economic growth is expected to reach around 3 1/2 per cent in 2017. Core inflation has eased recently in some advanced economies, owing in large part to temporary factors, while existing slack is being absorbed.
 
A number of unknowns, particularly with respect to US trade policy, still cloud the outlook. While the global projection continues to incorporate the judgment that such uncertainty will have a negative impact on trade and investment decisions, these unknowns remain a downside risk to the projection.
 
Yields on long-term sovereign bonds have edged up since April, but they remain low by historical standards. The increase in yields has been driven by stronger growth and market expectations of less accommodative monetary policy in advanced economies, including the reduction of the Federal Reserve balance sheet that is anticipated to begin later this year. Global credit spreads remain near their post-crisis lows, and equity prices are close to past highs. The US dollar has seen a modest depreciation.
 
Economic developments in the United States have evolved largely as expected at the time of the April Monetary Policy Report. First-quarter growth slowed primarily because of transitory factors, including drag from inventories and a weather-related decline in the consumption of utilities. Meanwhile, growth was supported by an unexpectedly strong and broad increase in business investment, including a sharp rebound in energy investment. Recent data, including labour income and consumption, are in line with an expected rebound in growth in the second quarter. Inflation has been weaker than expected, owing in large part to temporary factors. The pace of job gains remains consistent with a falling unemployment rate.
 
The prospects of expansionary US fiscal policy are less clear than they appeared in April, given delays in decision-making processes. Consequently, the fiscal stimulus assumed in the January and April forecasts has been removed.
 
US economic fundamentals remain supportive of anticipated growth of around 2 per cent over the projection horizon, slightly above estimated potential growth of 1 3/4 per cent. Consumption growth should remain firm, sustained by gains in labour income. Solid domestic demand is anticipated to continue to support business investment. Net exports, in contrast, are likely to remain a source of drag, driven partly by the past appreciation of the US dollar.
 
Recent developments point to more momentum in the euro area than anticipated in April, and growth has become more widespread across member countries. In the first quarter, every member experienced positive growth, which was the second time this happened in the past year. Recent indicators, including the Purchasing Managers' Index and measures of consumer confidence, suggest above-potential growth. Policy uncertainty also appears to have declined in recent months, partly reflecting the outcome of the election in France. Highly accommodative monetary policy and improved credit growth should continue to support a pace of expansion of around 1 3/4 per cent over the 2017-18 period, before tapering off to 1 1/2 per cent in 2019, as the output gap closes. In Japan sluggish wage gains and slow potential growth suggest a pace of expansion of around 1 per cent over the projection horizon.
 
Core inflation has been soft in a number of advanced economies. In many cases, this reflects remaining excess capacity-especially persistent labour market slack, which has held back wage growth. Wage and price inflation in these economies should pick up over the projection horizon as above-potential growth continues.
 
However, the fact that core inflation is soft and has also drifted down recently in some advanced economies, despite diminishing economic slack, requires further analysis. In large part, this softening can be attributed to temporary factors. In the United States, for example, increased competition among telecommunications providers and the introduction of certain generic pharmaceuticals have resulted in what are likely one-time declines in price levels.
 

The slowdown in inflation in several regions, however, suggests that common factors may also be playing a role. One possible explanation is that inflation expectations may have drifted downward resulting from a long period of below-target inflation in many advanced economies. Structural changes related to technological advances in the global economy may also be playing a role. Such advances may have boosted productivity in ways that are not readily measured, adding to global potential growth and thus implying that there is more excess capacity than is captured by standard estimates. The rise of e-commerce may also have heightened retail competition, by enabling retailers to compete across national borders, thus changing pricing behaviour and making prices more sensitive to new information and global market conditions. If lower inflation reflects increased global potential and heightened competition, it suggests higher living standards rather than signalling economic weakness. Evidence on various factors influencing inflation is mixed, and further analysis will be needed to assess their relative importance.
 
The outlook for China's economy remains consistent with the April Report. Growth has been uneven over the first half of the year, with a softer-than-expected first quarter offset by signs of stronger momentum in the second quarter. Credit growth remains elevated but should continue to gradually taper. Growth in China is expected to slow modestly over the projection horizon, from around 6 1/2 per cent in 2017 to 6 1/4 per cent in 2018-19, alongside an ongoing rebalancing toward more consumption-based growth.
 
There is more near-term momentum in oil-importing EMEs than was expected at the time of the April Report, reflecting a stronger resumption of growth in some countries, such as Brazil. Ongoing recoveries in EMEs that had been in recession and progress on economic reforms in some countries should support a pickup in growth from about 4 per cent in 2017 to around 4 1/4 per cent in 2019.
 
The pace of expansion in oil-exporting countries is projected to rise as the impact of the past oil price decline eases. Growth in the "rest of the world" grouping is expected to increase from about 1 3/4 per cent in 2017 to around 2 3/4 per cent in 2019.
 
Benchmark prices for global crude oil have recently averaged US$50 per barrel , about 10 per cent lower than assumed in April. The announced extension of the production cut by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and other oil producers into early 2018 has not fully relieved market anxiety over stronger-than-anticipated growth in US shale oil production and elevated inventories.
 
There are both upside and downside risks to oil prices. In the near term, risks are tilted to the downside because technological advances may continue to lower the costs of oil production, particularly the production of US shale oil. Supply could also increase quickly in 2018 if there were a disorderly exit from OPEC's current production agreement. Although technological advances may continue to exert downward pressures beyond 2018, upside risks are expected to dominate, since past investment cuts may lead to insufficient capacity to meet growing demand.
 
With respect to non-energy commodities, agricultural prices are higher than in April, partly due to weather-related disruptions in North America and Europe. Lumber prices are somewhat weaker as a result of softer US housing starts. Markets had largely priced in the additional anti-dumping duties on Canadian softwood lumber exports announced by the United States in June. Iron ore prices have declined, in part because of ongoing excess supply. Other base metal prices are broadly unchanged on aggregate. Looking ahead, the Bank of Canada's non-energy commodity price index should remain stable over the projection horizon.
 
Economic activity has grown strongly in recent quarters. While demand growth is led by robust household spending, early signs that its sources are becoming more balanced include recent pickups in exports and business investment. Growth is also broadening across regions and sectors, with more than two-thirds of industries expanding.
 
Over the projection horizon, the Bank expects the economy to continue to absorb excess capacity by expanding faster than potential output, albeit at a slower pace than in recent quarters. Economic activity will be supported by rising foreign demand, fiscal stimulus and accommodative monetary and financial conditions. Increased exports and investment will contribute to the anticipated broadening in the composition of demand, helping to sustain economic expansion as growth in both residential investment and household consumption slows.
 
Largely reflecting the surge in growth at the start of the year, real GDP is anticipated to expand by 2.8 per cent in 2017 before moderating to 2.0 per cent in 2018 and 1.6 per cent in 2019. The output gap is expected to close around the end of 2017, earlier than projected in April.
 
Consumer price index inflation has been soft recently, for the most part as a result of food, electricity and automobile prices. Excess supply in the economy has also been a factor. Inflation is forecast to pick up and return close to 2 per cent in the middle of 2018 as relative price movements dissipate and excess capacity is absorbed.
 
Growth in GDP in the first quarter of 2017 picked up strongly to 3.7 per cent, in line with expectations in the April Report. Domestic demand was robust: consumption growth strengthened, housing activity rose sharply, and investment in the oil and gas sector rebounded from a prolonged steep decline. A large rebuilding of manufacturing inventories, following a drawdown in the previous quarter, also added significantly to growth. In contrast, outside the resource sector, the expansion of exports and investment spending remained subdued.
 
GDP growth is projected to average 2 1/2 per cent in the second and third quarters and remain above potential output growth. Recent monthly data indicate that export growth has increased while business investment growth has eased. In particular, relative to the first quarter, oil and gas drilling rig activity has levelled off, and the strong growth in imports of machinery and equipment has slowed. In addition, activity in the housing sector has abated, largely as a result of sharp declines in resales in Toronto and surrounding areas. At the same time, growth in consumer spending is projected to slow to a more sustainable pace as the temporary effect of government transfers and special payments on growth in household disposable income diminishes. As well, motor vehicle sales, which have been stronger than suggested by fundamental drivers of demand, are at an all-time high and are expected to moderate.
 
Over the past year, a significant amount of excess capacity in the economy has been absorbed, as indicated by a narrowing in the Bank's two measures of economic slack. Responses to the Bank's summer Business Outlook Survey also suggest an increase in capacity pressures. Overall, the Bank judges that in the second quarter of 2017 the degree of excess capacity in the economy was between 0 and 1 per cent. This compares with a range of estimated excess capacity between 1 1/2 and 2 1/2 per cent a year earlier.
 
Several labour market indicators are consistent with this assessment, suggesting that labour market slack is also being absorbed, although with a lag. In recent months, employment growth has been solid and the unemployment rate has declined. The Business Outlook Survey also points to a broad-based tightening in labour market conditions, with increasing reports of the prevalence and intensity of labour shortages. Various wage measures continue to suggest modest growth, although wage growth as measured by the Survey of Employment, Payrolls and Hours has risen to 2.3 per cent on average since the beginning of the year, up from 1.2 per cent on average over 2016. Other indicators suggest slack remains, particularly in energy-intensive sectors and regions. Slack is also reflected in elevated levels of long-term unemployment and below-trend average hours worked.
 
CPI inflation has fallen since the beginning of the year, reaching an estimated 1.4 per cent on average in the second quarter, while two of the Bank's three measures of core inflation have also continued to decline. The slowdown in inflation can be explained mainly by easing consumer energy and automobile price inflation . Both slower gasoline price inflation and the electricity rebates from the Ontario government have weighed on consumer energy prices. CPI inflation and the core measures are also being held down by current and past economic slack, but this effect has declined in recent quarters. In addition, it is possible that global structural factors, as discussed on page 4, could be contributing to low inflation in Canada.
 
The Bank projects that real GDP growth will remain above that of potential output and broaden further but will moderate over the projection horizon. Real GDP is anticipated to expand by 2.8 per cent in 2017, 2.0 per cent in 2018 and 1.6 per cent in 2019. Primarily because household expenditures are more robust than expected, growth is stronger in 2017 and 2018 than projected in April. Consequently, economic slack is absorbed more quickly, with the output gap now anticipated to close around the end of 2017. Growth in 2019 is projected to approach estimated potential output growth.
 
Growth is expected to continue to broaden across sectors and regions because the economy has largely adjusted to the decline in oil prices that began in the second half of 2014. In particular, the drag on investment spending and economic growth from lower oil prices is mostly over, and growth in commodity-related activity is resuming. This economic adjustment has been supported by accommodative monetary and financial conditions and the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar. However, the adverse effect on incomes lingers, particularly in energy-intensive provinces.
 
At the same time, production in other goods industries is also picking up, while the solid expansion in the service sector persists. Results from the summer Business Outlook Survey also suggest that growth will continue to broaden. For example, forward-looking indicators of business activity have generally strengthened across regions and sectors.
 
Beyond 2017, GDP growth is forecast to broaden further across demand categories. Export growth is projected to increase as foreign demand strengthens, leading to increased investment and an expansion in productive capacity. Government spending is also expected to boost growth over the projection horizon, reflecting previously announced fiscal measures. In particular, public investment is expected to be a significant contributor to economic growth over the near term. Meanwhile, household spending will continue to support growth, but its contribution is anticipated to moderate. Consumption growth will be restrained by elevated levels of household debt and higher longer-term borrowing costs as global long-term yields are projected to gradually rise.
 
While Canada's exports have experienced a structural loss of global market share, they have continued to recover and are expected to keep expanding over the projection horizon, roughly in line with the broad-based growth in foreign demand. In particular, overall export growth is expected to pick up in the coming quarters - an assessment that is consistent with the summer Business Outlook Survey. Many respondents noted that their positive US outlook was a good sign for sales, citing as examples solid activity in the US construction sector, increased demand for information technology services and oil, and increased tourism to Canada. However, as anticipated in April, changes in the production mandates of multinational auto assemblers mean there will be reductions in motor vehicle production later in 2017; as a result, exports of motor vehicles and parts will decline.
 
Growth in commodity exports is anticipated to increase moderately over the projection. Prices for oil and base metals have declined recently, limiting production growth in these sectors. At the same time, new trade restrictions are heavily constraining softwood lumber exports. Conditions are more favourable for some other non-energy commodities; for example, growth in agricultural production and exports is expected to rise over the projection.
 
Imports are also expected to grow modestly, supported by growth in domestic demand - particularly consumption and investment. The effect of the past depreciation of the dollar is evident in some sectors such as tourism, since many Canadians are opting to vacation in Canada rather than abroad. However, there is limited evidence so far in other sectors that the effect of the dollar has led to domestic production replacing imports.
 
As with exports, business investment is anticipated to increase over the projection horizon, triggered by expanding economic activity in both the non-resource and resource sectors. The expansion in the resource sector indicates that the adjustment in the level of investment in this sector in 2015 and 2016 to the past oil price shock is largely complete.
 
Growth in investment outside the resource sector is expected to increase moderately in the near term as more firms expand their capacity to meet future demand. Nevertheless, the recovery in business investment is anticipated to remain below what would normally be expected based on historical experience, partly reflecting structural challenges such as slower labour force growth as well as concerns related to US policy uncertainty.
 
Investment in the oil and gas sector rebounded sharply in the first quarter but is expected to expand gradually over the projection. The outlook is supported by an analysis of the capital expenditure plans of oil and gas firms and the Bank's consultations with the energy sector. Firms expressed a sense of cautious optimism and are prudently implementing their investment plans. Investment prospects for the sector are, however, highly contingent on the outlook for global oil prices, which have recently declined.
 
The summer Business Outlook Survey provides evidence that business sentiment continues to improve, which bodes well for investment. Intentions to increase spending on machinery and equipment over the next year remain broad-based across regions and sectors.
 
Household expenditures are forecast to remain robust in the near term, supported by the expansion of employment, an increase in wage growth and strong credit growth. There are signs that a rebound in incomes is under way in energy-intensive provinces, while incomes outside these provinces continue to register solid gains. Moreover, the strength in consumer spending seen through much of the country is spreading to energy-intensive provinces - a trend that is expected to continue.
 
Overall, growth in consumption is expected to ease as growth in disposable income gradually slows, partly as the effect of the introduction of the Canada Child Benefit fades. High household indebtedness and a slowdown in the housing market are also anticipated to weigh on consumer spending.
 
Until very recently, housing market activity had been quite strong in some regions. Of note was the sharp rise in resales and starts through the early spring in Toronto and surrounding areas. In addition, markets appeared to have bottomed out in Alberta, with sales up from their levels a year ago. National house price growth reached 20 per cent on a year-over-year basis in April, led by strong price gains in Toronto and surrounding areas and, to a lesser extent, in the Greater Vancouver Area. Price growth in other parts of Canada was much more subdued.
 
However, a recent sharp decline in resales and moderation in starts in Toronto and surrounding areas have contributed to a slowdown in housing market activity since April. The Ontario Fair Housing Plan has likely played a role, but it is too early to assess the extent of its effect.
 
Looking ahead, residential investment is anticipated to contribute less to overall growth. Macroprudential and housing policy measures, as well as higher longer-term borrowing costs resulting from the projected gradual rise in global long-term yields, are all expected to weigh on housing expenditures.
 
CPI inflation is anticipated to slow somewhat further in the third quarter, to average 1.3 per cent, owing in large part to the last installment of Ontario electricity rebates in July.
 
Inflation is then projected to rise and reach close to 2 per cent in the middle of 2018. Two key relative price movements are expected to together add about 0.6 percentage points to inflation. First, food price inflation, which has been weak for some time, is expected to rebound as agricultural prices rise and as the disinflationary effects of increased competition in the retail food sector fade. Second, the dampening impact of the electricity rebates in Ontario on inflation is anticipated to gradually dissipate.
 
In addition, the expected closing of the output gap will have an impact. In the third quarter of this year, the effect of excess supply subtracts 0.2 percentage points from inflation. As excess supply is absorbed, inflation is expected to return sustainably close to the 2 per cent target.
 
This projection is consistent with medium - and long-term inflation expectations remaining well anchored. The June 2017 Consensus Economics forecast for CPI inflation is 1.9 per cent in 2017 and 2.0 per cent in 2018. Based on the past dispersion of private sector forecasts, a reasonable range around the base-case projection for CPI inflation is ±0.3 percentage points. This range is intended to convey a sense of forecast uncertainty.
 
The possibility of a notable shift toward protectionist global trade policies remains a source of uncertainty surrounding the outlook. However, it is difficult to fully quantify the implications of this shift without more clarity about the actual policy measures and their timing. The Bank applied judgment to capture the adverse effects of this uncertainty on business investment and exports in the base case. As in April, this helps to better balance the risks around the outlook.
 
The Bank's outlook for inflation is subject to several upside and downside risks originating from both the external environment and the domestic economy. Overall, the Bank assesses that the risks to the projected path for inflation are roughly balanced. As in past reports, the focus is on a selection of risks identified as most important for the projected path for inflation, drawing from a larger set of risks taken into account in the forecast.
 
The evolution of the risks since April is summarized in Table 5. Two of the risks in the April Report have been modified. First, sluggish business investment in Canada has been incorporated into a broader risk that also includes weaker export growth. Second, higher potential output in Canada is now part of a more comprehensive risk that covers persistent weakness in global and Canadian inflation.
 
Inflation in some advanced economies, including Canada, has slowed. While much of the recent slowdown can be accounted for by temporary factors, it is possible that global structural factors, discussed on page 4, may be playing a larger role than believed. Over the projection horizon, these structural factors could exert disinflationary pressure in Canada and abroad that is not fully captured in the base-case projection.
 
Also, as discussed in the April Report, the decline in the measures of core inflation in Canada could indicate that the current level of potential output is higher than estimated, resulting in more excess supply and less inflationary pressure. In addition, as the economy approaches full capacity, firm creation and business investment could rise by more than expected, and workers who have left the labour force or who were underemployed would be fully re-employed, boosting potential output over the projection period.
 
While the base case includes US economic growth that is above the rate of potential, an even stronger growth path is also possible. The ongoing recovery together with prospective policy changes, such as fiscal stimulus and deregulation, could trigger "animal spirits," or a surge in business confidence that leads to an acceleration in the rate of investment, firm creation, innovation and productivity growth. Stronger US household spending and public and private investment would have positive spillovers for Canadian business confidence, investment and exports.
 
While the Bank's projection for exports and business investment is cautious, there is a risk that competitiveness challenges may be stronger than anticipated. A further loss in the market share of Canadian exporters could postpone prospective investment projects or move some investment activities abroad.
 
The disappointing performance of business investment since the 2007-09 global financial crisis could also indicate that demographic forces or other structural factors are more relevant than previously estimated.
 
Strong motor vehicle and other retail sales combined with the high level of consumer confidence point to robust underlying consumption. While the Bank expects growth in consumption to slow in the coming quarters, its recent strength could persist if wage and household income growth were to increase faster than expected as the labour market approaches full employment. Moreover, the recent strength in credit growth could persist longer than anticipated. While this would provide a boost to economic activity, it could further exacerbate the macroeconomic and financial vulnerabilities associated with high household indebtedness.
 
Imbalances in the Canadian housing market are an important vulnerability, particularly in areas where house prices have grown at a faster pace than can be readily explained by fundamentals, such as in the greater Toronto and Vancouver areas. A regional house price correction would have important adverse effects on residential investment, related consumption and real estate services in the affected regions. The fall in house prices could further weigh on consumption through negative wealth and collateral effects and could be amplified by the high levels of household indebtedness. Overall, a regional house price correction would most likely be localized but could have a material negative impact on the macroeconomic outlook.