Global economic growth remains modest, although the pace of economic activity varies significantly across the major economies. The US economic expansion is proceeding at a moderate pace, with the continued strengthening in private demand being partly offset by the impact of fiscal consolidation. In Japan, fiscal and monetary stimulus is contributing to a rapid recovery in economic growth. In contrast, economic activity in the euro area remains weak, owing to fiscal austerity, fragmented access to credit and low confidence. While stronger than in the advanced economies, real GDP growth in China and other emerging-market economies has slowed, exerting downward pressure on global commodity prices.
 
Global financial conditions remain very supportive, despite an increase in bond yields and a more recent pullback from some risky assets. Considerable monetary policy stimulus remains in place in the United States and other advanced economies in response to continuing large excess supply gaps and persistent disinflationary pressures.
 
The global economy is expected to grow at a rate of 2.8 per cent in 2013, before picking up to 3.5 per cent in 2014 and 3.7 per cent in 2015. The Bank's projection is somewhat weaker than in the April Monetary Policy Report, owing primarily to a downward revision to real GDP growth in China and other emerging-market economies.
 
Global financial conditions continue to be very supportive. Although yields on most government bonds have risen sharply in recent months, they are still quite low by historical standards. As the global recovery, led by the United States, proceeds and downside risks recede, a normalization of interest rates will be both necessary and desirable. As this process unfolds, some short-term volatility and temporary overshooting are to be expected.
 
Yields on higher-rated US corporate bonds have moved up in tandem with government bond yields, but remain close to historical lows. Some other US assets, including real estate investment trusts, high-yield corporate debt and municipal bonds, have registered larger declines in prices. Yield spreads on euro-area peripheral sovereign bonds have also widened in recent weeks.
 
Equity prices are at historically high levels in many advanced economies. Shifts in investor confidence regarding the implementation by the Japanese authorities of a three-pronged reform program have contributed to recent volatility in the Nikkei. Nevertheless, the index is still around 60 per cent higher than in November 2012, when expectations of aggressive stimulus policies first took hold.
 
Emerging-market economies have experienced increased capital outflows in response to weakening domestic growth prospects and higher interest rates in advanced economies. As a result, bond yields in emerging markets have risen, equity prices have fallen and currencies have depreciated, despite interventions by many central banks.
 
The US economic expansion is projected to become more firmly entrenched as the effects of fiscal consolidation and household deleveraging gradually dissipate. Highly accommodative monetary policy continues to play a key role in supporting the recovery.
 
Growth in US real GDP picked up to 1.8 per cent in the first quarter, underpinned by a moderate increase in consumer spending and continued robust momentum in residential construction. Economic growth is estimated to have remained modest in the second quarter, but is expected to strengthen gradually through to mid-2014 and stabilize around 3 1/4 per cent thereafter.
 
Fiscal consolidation continues to weigh heavily on US GDP growth. As noted in the Bank's April Report, fiscal drag is expected to be 1.8 percentage points in 2013, 0.8 percentage points in 2014 and zero in 2015.
 
In contrast, monetary policy is projected to remain highly accommodative. The US Federal Reserve has indicated that it may slow the pace of asset purchases later this year and end purchases around mid-year 2014, provided that the outlook for economic activity and the labour market improves, as it anticipates. However, since the unemployment rate is expected to remain elevated and inflation pressures subdued, most members of the Federal Open Market Committee do not expect the first increase in the policy interest rate to occur until 2015.
 
Growth in consumer spending is estimated to have been modest in the second quarter of 2013 as households adjusted to previously enacted tax increases. Thereafter, consumption is projected to grow at a more solid pace, supported by further gains in employment and wages, easier access to credit, improving confidence, and the significant boost to household net worth from higher equity and house prices. Housing activity has been expanding at a rapid pace for several quarters, albeit from extremely low levels, and should continue to do so, supported by the same favourable fundamentals noted above and a rebound in household formation. The positive feedback loop between the recovery in housing activity and consumption growth is expected to persist over the projection horizon. Given this dynamic and the considerable degree of household deleveraging that has already taken place, there is a risk that consumption and housing activity could surprise on the upside. If this were to occur, it would have a positive impact on business confidence and investment.
 
Excess capacity, together with uncertainty about future demand, has weighed on investment spending in recent quarters. Growth in business investment is projected to rebound, however, as confidence recovers and overall demand conditions continue to improve. The existing low cost of capital and strong financial position of corporations will provide further support. Rapid growth in the US energy sector continues to drive spending on infrastructure, and the resultant lower energy prices will stimulate US economic activity.
 
Exports are projected to make an increasing contribution to US economic growth, buoyed by a firming in foreign demand. Non-oil imports are also expected to rise in line with stronger domestic demand, while overseas oil imports will continue to be displaced by growing domestic production.
 
Ongoing excess supply in labour and product markets is putting downward pressure on US inflation. Year-over-year growth in the price index for core personal consumption expenditures has slowed to 1.1 per cent in recent months, a record low. Over the projection horizon, US inflation is expected to rise toward the 2 per cent inflation target as excess supply gradually diminishes.
 
In the euro area, real GDP fell by 1.1 per cent in the first quarter of 2013, owing largely to weak investment. Growth turned slightly positive in Germany but was negative in most other countries, owing to fiscal austerity, tight credit conditions, extremely high unemployment and low confidence. In light of the persistent weakness in economic conditions and subdued inflation, the European Central Bank reduced its policy rate by 25 basis points in May and later provided guidance that it would keep the rate low for an extended period. Financial fragmentation continues to impair the transmission of monetary policy, however, as reflected in the divergence between lending rates in the peripheral and core economies.
 
The level of economic activity in the euro area is expected to stabilize this year, with a gradual recovery unfolding in 2014. In 2015, growth is anticipated to pick up somewhat, reflecting reduced drag from fiscal consolidation and some improvement in credit conditions.
 
The Bank's projection assumes that the crisis in the euro area will continue to be contained. However, a sustained recovery will require further progress on bank deleveraging, structural and fiscal reforms, deeper economic integration, and timely completion of the banking union.  A possible reintensification of the euro-area crisis therefore remains a significant downside risk to the Bank's projection.
 
Japanese authorities are implementing an ambitious policy and reform program to boost the country's growth prospects and end deflation. This program is often referred to as the "Three Arrows" and consists of: the adoption of a 2 per cent inflation target by the Bank of Japan and unprecedented quantitative monetary easing to achieve this goal within approximately two years; substantial fiscal stimulus in the near term, followed by fiscal consolidation starting in mid-2014; and structural reforms to promote long-term growth. Monetary and fiscal stimulus is having positive effects. Equity prices are significantly higher than in November, real longer-term interest rates on Japanese government bonds have fallen below zero, the yen has depreciated by more than 20 per cent against the US dollar and confidence has increased sharply. These developments have contributed to a rapid recovery in economic activity, with real GDP growth strengthening to 4.1 per cent in the first quarter of 2013.
 
Economic growth in Japan is projected to remain robust over the remainder of 2013, averaging around 3 per cent, and to moderate thereafter in the context of increases in the value-added tax. However, the recent volatility in financial conditions highlights the challenges faced by the Japanese authorities in implementing their "Three Arrows" agenda. Authorities have made it clear that, in addition to monetary policy, ambitious structural and fiscal reforms are essential for addressing issues related to Japan's aging population and elevated public debt levels.
 
Real GDP growth in China slowed to 7.5 per cent in the second quarter of 2013 on a year-over-year basis. The ongoing deceleration in China's economy has largely reflected weaker foreign demand and a moderation in the growth of investment spending. In addition, the authorities have recently introduced new measures to restrain both credit growth and activities in the shadow banking sector.  These measures have contributed to the recent stress in China's interbank market.
 
Growth in China's real GDP is projected to ease further, to 7 1/4 per cent, through to the end of 2014, as weaker growth in public infrastructure investment, excess capacity in some heavy industries and measures designed to reduce credit growth lead to a further slowing in the pace of investment. A gradual strengthening in consumption, sustained by solid labour market conditions and "consumption-friendly" structural reforms, should allow the growth of economic activity to stabilize at around 7 1/2 per cent through 2015. Net exports contribute only slightly to GDP growth over the projection period, restrained by the continued appreciation of the real effective exchange rate for the renminbi. Compared with the April Report, real GDP growth has been revised down through 2015, reflecting tighter financial conditions. Efforts to rein in credit growth, existing imbalances in the Chinese economy and challenges associated with shifting to consumption led growth represent significant downside risks to the projection.
 
Real GDP growth in other emerging-market economies , such as Russia and India, has also slowed in recent quarters, owing to structural constraints and weak external demand. Moreover, with economic growth moderating, EMEs are particularly vulnerable to global financial turbulence. Indeed, credit conditions have tightened following outflows of capital caused by reduced prospects for domestic growth and higher interest rates in advanced economies. Apart from a few central banks, monetary authorities in a number of EMEs have lowered their policy interest rates and allowed some exchange rate depreciation, in response to the slower pace of economic growth. Macroeconomic stimulus measures, strengthening external demand and structural reforms (particularly those aimed at reducing supply bottlenecks) are expected to support a pickup in growth over the projection horizon.
 
Slowing demand in China and other EMEs, combined with some retreat from risky assets, has exerted downward pressure on many commodity prices in recent months, especially base metals prices.
 
Global oil prices, as measured by the Brent benchmark, are up somewhat relative to the April Report, in response to heightened geopolitical concerns. Oil prices in North America have increased significantly, however, benefiting from improved transportation capacity and a rise in seasonal demand that have helped to reduce inventories in the US Midwest. As a result, the spread between the prices for Brent and West Texas Intermediate crude oil has narrowed to approximately US$3, the lowest level in more than two years. The gap between WTI and Western Canada Select has returned to a more normal level of roughly US$15, down from an average of US$35 in January. Natural gas prices continue to be driven by weather-related factors and have fallen by about 14 per cent.
 
The latest futures curves suggest that crude oil prices will decline by roughly 11 per cent through 2015, consistent with a rise in global production, modest growth in demand and an expected decline in the risk premium associated with tensions in the Middle East. The spread between Brent and WTI prices is projected to widen slightly, and the gap between WTI and WCS prices is also anticipated to increase. Natural gas prices in North America are expected to rise to around US$4.30 per million BTU by the end of 2015, reflecting increased demand for electricity generation.
 
Prices for non-energy commodities have fallen by 7 per cent since the last Report. On balance, they are projected to remain unchanged through to mid-2014, before rising gradually thereafter, owing to improved global demand. In response to a temporary slowdown in US residential construction, weaker Chinese demand and a strong increase in North American production, lumber prices have plunged by about 22 per cent, erasing the gains seen since last October. Prices are expected to rise over the projection horizon, however, driven by the continued strength in US residential construction. In contrast, base metals prices are expected to weaken in the near term, in response to slowing demand (especially from China), rising production and high inventories. Prices for base metals are then expected to rise modestly starting in mid-2014, supported by a pickup in global demand.
 
The Bank's foreign activity measure, which captures the composition of foreign demand for Canadian non-commodity exports, has reversed only about 75 per cent of the decline registered during the 2008-09 recession, mostly reflecting the improving, but still low, level of activity in the US residential construction sector. Over the projection horizon, however, the measure is expected to grow at a solid pace, averaging close to 5.5 per cent per year, supported by strong increases in US business and residential investment in a context of continued improvement in household and business confidence. The foreign activity measure is projected to return to its pre-recession level in early 2014.
 
The Bank of Canada commodity price index has increased slightly since the April Report, owing to higher prices for crude oil. The BCPI is expected to remain relatively stable through 2015, with the effects of declining oil prices offset by a gradual rise in the prices of non-energy commodities, including lumber and, eventually, base metals. As a result, the projected profile for commodity prices is not expected to provide significant additional support to Canada's terms of trade over the projection horizon. Oil prices nevertheless remain at historically elevated levels and should support Canadian business investment in the coming years.
 
The Canadian dollar has averaged approximately 96 cents US since the May fixed announcement date, compared with the 98 cents US assumed in April. By convention, it is assumed to remain at its recent level of 96 cents US over the projection horizon.
 
The Bank expects the Canadian economy to grow at a moderate pace through 2015. While growth will be choppy in the near term as a result of unusual temporary factors, underlying momentum in the economy is expected to build into 2014. After picking up sharply in the first quarter of 2013, exports are projected to continue to recover, which should boost confidence and lead to increasingly solid growth in business fixed investment. The economy will also be supported by continued growth in consumer spending, while further modest declines in residential investment are expected. Growth in real GDP is projected to be sufficient to absorb the current material excess capacity in the economy around mid-2015, contributing to a gradual rise in total CPI and core inflation to 2 per cent between now and then.
 
Relative to the April Report, the outlook for growth and inflation in Canada is little changed. While real GDP growth in the first quarter of 2013 was stronger than expected, the Bank foresees a somewhat more challenging external environment over the projection horizon than previously anticipated. This reflects slightly reduced expectations for global economic growth, which contributes to a lower profile for commodity prices.
 
Taking into account all of the risks bearing on the outlook, the Bank views the projection to be balanced.
 
Financial conditions in Canada remain accommodative, underpinned by the considerable monetary policy stimulus currently in place. Nevertheless, Canadian financial markets have experienced increased volatility since the April Report, reflecting developments in global markets.
 
As in other advanced economies, yields on Canadian government bonds have risen, reversing their decline from earlier in the year. Yields on corporate bonds have also increased, as has the volatility in credit spreads. Still, Canadian bond yields remain low by historical standards, owing in part to strong international demand for Canadian fixed-income securities. Canadian equities have continued to underperform equities in most other advanced economies, largely reflecting the Canadian market's relatively high exposure to developments in commodity prices.
 
Despite the recent volatility in capital markets, overall credit conditions for Canadian firms remain favourable, which is reflected in the responses to the Bank's latest Business Outlook Survey and Senior Loan Officer Survey. Both surveys suggest that, as of mid-June, credit conditions had remained broadly unchanged since last autumn, following a period of almost uninterrupted easing since late 2009.
 
Against this backdrop, the growth of total business credit has moderated through the first five months of 2013 to a rate close to its historical average. This moderation follows very rapid growth in the latter part of 2012, which was boosted by the early refinancing of debt at low interest rates. Firms' borrowing needs have remained relatively modest in recent quarters, given the weak growth of fixed investment and the relatively high cash positions of non-financial firms.
 
Borrowing costs for households remain very low, although some banks have recently announced increases in fixed-term mortgage rates in conjunction with the general rise in market interest rates. Growth in total household credit has continued to slow since the April Report, to a rate considerably below its historical average, and the ratio of household debt to disposable income has edged lower. The cumulative effects of changes to mortgage insurance rules and the tightening of mortgage underwriting guidelines, increasing consumer appreciation of the risks associated with elevated debt levels, and reminders about the eventual normalization of interest rates have all contributed to this downward trend. Recent data revisions confirm the sustained household response to these influences over the past several quarters, with the debt-to-income  ratio revised lower. The Bank expects a flat-to-lower profile for the household debt-to-disposable-income ratio over the projection horizon.
 
Reflecting in part the passing of transitory factors, growth in the narrow monetary aggregates has slowed from its very rapid rate in the first quarter of the year. Growth in the broad monetary aggregates has moderated as well, mainly reflecting the contribution from narrow money. The overall trend in broad money remains consistent with the Bank's inflation projection.
 
There continues to be a material degree of slack in the Canadian economy. As expected, real GDP growth accelerated in the first quarter of 2013, following weakness throughout 2012. At 2.5 per cent (at annual rates), growth was stronger than estimated in the April Report, outpacing estimates of growth in the economy's production potential for the first time in six quarters.
 
The first-quarter expansion was driven by a large pickup in exports, which reflected strengthening private demand in the United States in recent quarters and the reversal of temporary disruptions that restrained activity in the energy and mining sectors in the second half of 2012. At the same time, most major components of final domestic demand increased only modestly. The stronger growth in the Canadian economy in the first quarter, coupled with some modest upward revisions over the 2008-12 period, resulted in a real GDP level in the first quarter that was 0.5 per cent higher than anticipated in the last Report. As a result, the conventional measure of the output gap is now somewhat smaller than previously estimated, at 1.0 per cent in the first quarter, compared with 1.2 per cent in April.
 
Growth in real GDP is forecast to have slowed sharply in the second quarter, to around 1.0 per cent. This slowing primarily reflects the immediate adverse impact on economic activity of the catastrophic floods in Alberta and the province-wide strike in the construction sector in Quebec in the latter part of June. Since the lost activity is expected to be largely recovered in the third quarter, the Bank will look through the volatility induced by these temporary factors when assessing the degree of excess capacity in the Canadian economy.
 
On balance, labour market indicators point to a greater degree of slack than the conventional measure of the output gap. The level of average hours worked continues to be significantly below its trend, while the proportion of involuntary part-time workers and the average duration of unemployment remain at elevated levels. Wage increases have remained subdued, consistent with the observed softness in price inflation in the services sector. Despite solid employment gains, the unemployment rate has continued to hover somewhat above 7 per cent. Finally, the Bank's latest Business Outlook Survey finds little evidence of labour shortages.
 
By contrast, in the summer Business Outlook Survey, the proportion of firms expecting that they would have difficulty meeting an unexpected increase in demand has risen to around its historical average, suggesting limited slack in the economy. This is consistent with weak growth in the capital stock in recent quarters, and with the survey findings that uncertainty continues to affect the investment decisions of many firms. As business confidence improves in response to evidence of firming demand, physical capacity can be expected to expand at a more significant pace. These investments will contribute to the reconstruction of the Canadian economy's production potential by supporting stronger growth in productivity and helping to alleviate capacity constraints in some sectors.
 
Taking into account the range of indicators of capacity pressures, as well as the temporary nature of the factors affecting activity in the near term, the Bank judges that the economy was operating roughly 1.25 per cent below its production capacity in the second quarter of 2013, a similar degree of slack to that expected in the April Report.
 
The Bank continues to forecast an improvement in the underlying momentum of the Canadian economy through mid-2014 as external demand increases and business confidence strengthens. Nevertheless, the protracted nature of the recovery in US and global demand remains an important headwind to the Canadian economy, particularly in the current environment of greater restraint in domestic household and government spending. Accordingly, as in the April Report, the profile for real GDP in Canada is projected to remain relatively subdued for this stage of the cycle .
 
As noted earlier, economic growth in Canada is expected to be choppy in the near term. From an average rate of 2.4 per cent over the second and third quarters of 2013, growth is projected to rise gradually to 2.8 per cent in the second quarter of 2014. Given this projection for real GDP, the Canadian economy is expected to reach full capacity around mid-2015, as in the April Report.
 
After picking up sharply in the first quarter, exports are projected to continue to increase at a solid pace. The further recovery in US business and residential investment should particularly benefit those export sectors that have lagged thus far, notably machinery and equipment and lumber products. The diversification of Canadian trade toward faster-growing economies should also help to improve Canada's export performance.  In spite of the expected solid growth ahead, the level of exports is not projected to return to its pre-recession peak until the second half of 2014. This reflects not only the protracted nature of the global recovery, but also ongoing competitiveness challenges and capacity constraints in some sectors that limit the ability of Canadian exporters to respond quickly to increased foreign demand.
 
Following a strong recovery from the depressed levels experienced in the aftermath of the 2008-09 recession, the growth of business fixed investment has weakened in recent quarters, reflecting concerns regarding the strength of both domestic and foreign demand, as well as challenges specific to the resource sector. As a result, growth in business fixed investment is likely to remain moderate over the near term, despite the healthy aggregate financial position of Canadian firms, favourable credit conditions and the strong Canadian dollar, as well as the impetus to improve productivity amid heightened pressures to become more competitive. Over the projection horizon, growth in business fixed investment is expected to strengthen as the recovery in Canadian exports becomes more firmly entrenched, providing greater confidence about the prospects for global demand.
 
In the first quarter of 2013, household spending failed to contribute materially to real GDP growth for the first time since early 2009, since consumption rose only modestly and residential investment declined for the third consecutive quarter. This extends a recent trend toward slower growth in household spending, which, combined with the downward revisions to the debt-to-income  ratio and upward revisions to the savings rate, points to increased household prudence.
 
In the Bank's forecast, consumption increases at a moderate pace, slightly above the rate of growth of disposable income. Nevertheless, the savings rate remains well above the average of the past decade - consistent with the persistence of a degree of household caution in the context of high debt levels. Residential investment is projected to decline further from historically high levels, reflecting lower rates of new construction as previous overbuilding is addressed, thus contributing to a more sustainable path for the housing sector. Recent increases in fixed-term mortgage rates will also provide a degree of restraint. While the Bank expects household caution to remain a constraint on spending over the forecast horizon, it is possible that, in an environment where borrowing conditions are still highly favourable, household expenditures could gather renewed momentum. The rebound in the housing market in recent months, which can be seen across the indicators for new construction, resale activity and house prices, reinforces this possibility - although some variation around the trend is to be expected amid a constructive evolution of household imbalances.
 
Government spending is expected to contribute only marginally to real GDP growth over the projection horizon. While this contribution is considerably weaker than has been typical historically, it is in line with the announced plans of federal, provincial and local governments to consolidate spending.
 
Total CPI and core inflation have stayed low in recent months, and both are expected to remain subdued in the near term.
 
Low core inflation, averaging 1.1 per cent in April and May, continues to reflect persistent material excess capacity in the economy, heightened competitive pressures on retailers from both domestic and foreign sources, relatively subdued increases in wages amid slack labour market conditions, and a number of temporary sector-specific factors. There remains some uncertainty regarding the importance of each of these factors in accounting for the low level of core inflation. Total CPI inflation, which averaged 0.6 per cent in April and May, has been restrained not only by low core inflation, but also by declining mortgage interest costs.
 
Core inflation is expected to remain subdued in coming quarters. As the economy gradually returns to full capacity and, with inflation expectations well anchored, core inflation is projected to rise to 2 per cent around mid-2015. In addition, even though wage growth has been relatively modest recently, productivity growth has been weak. As a result, the growth of unit labour costs has risen somewhat above 2 per cent in recent quarters, and is expected to contribute to the gradual rise in core inflation. Together with core inflation, total CPI inflation is expected to return gradually to target around mid-2015.
 
Indicators of inflation expectations are consistent with the Bank's projection, which shows inflation remaining below the 2 per cent target until around mid-2015. In this regard, the July Consensus Economics forecasts for total CPI inflation were 1.1 per cent in 2013 and 1.7 per cent in 2014. According to the latest Business Outlook Survey, inflation expectations have eased within the Bank's inflation-control range, with a slightly greater majority of firms expecting total CPI inflation over the next two years to remain in the bottom half of that range. A number of firms cited the slow-growth environment as a factor driving their expectations. In the context of increased volatility in financial markets in recent weeks, market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations have also edged down, although they continue to be consistent with the 2 per cent inflation-control target.
 
This projection includes a path of monetary policy consistent with achieving the inflation target. Guidance on this path is provided in the accompanying press release.
 
The uncertainty surrounding the Bank's inflation projection is illustrated using fan charts. Chart 33 and Chart 34 depict the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the third quarter of 2013 to the end of 2015.
 
The outlook presented in this Report balances the many upside and downside risks to inflation in the projection. Four of the most important risks are described below: three of them emanate from the external environment, while one is domestic.
 
The major upside risk to inflation in Canada is stronger-than-expected private demand in the United States. The solid recovery in the US housing market, and in the economy more generally, could generate stronger growth in labour income. Moreover, higher prices for housing and equities could cause household deleveraging to end sooner than expected. Together, these developments would result in more rapid growth in consumption and residential investment, which in turn would give businesses greater confidence in investing and hiring, thus creating a virtuous circle for US private demand. Although this would likely be accompanied by higher interest rates, putting some upward pressure on rates in Canada, the boost to US real GDP would more than offset the pressure on rates. Stronger demand in the United States would be transmitted to the Canadian economy through the trade channel and higher commodity prices.
 
Failure to contain the crisis in Europe remains the most serious downside risk facing the global and Canadian economies. Although Canada has limited direct trade and financial exposure to Europe, if a euro-area country or large bank were to lose access to debt markets, leading to a sudden loss of confidence, financial contagion to the United States could cause US credit spreads to widen and equity prices to fall. The knock-on effects in Canada from weaker US demand and financial market turbulence would have significant consequences for our exports and for domestic economic activity.
 
Even if the situation in the euro area remains contained, weakness could persist longer than projected, owing to reform fatigue, persistently high unemployment, and delays in the necessary institutional reforms and balance-sheet repairs. The combination of weaker foreign activity, higher lending spreads, lower commodity prices and negative confidence effects would act as a drag on Canadian growth.
 
The elevated level of household debt and imbalances in some segments of the housing market remain the most important domestic source of risk to the Canadian economy. In the past several months, there has been a constructive evolution of household sector imbalances. Nevertheless, despite the continued slowing in credit growth, the level of debt remains high. In addition, some of the latest data point to the risk of renewed momentum in the housing market in the context of continuing very low borrowing rates. This renewed momentum would produce a temporary boost to economic activity and inflation, but more importantly, it would exacerbate existing imbalances and therefore increase the probability of a more severe correction later on. Such a correction could have sizable spillover effects to other parts of the economy.
 
Efforts by Chinese authorities to contain domestic financial risks may result in a greater-than-anticipated slowdown in credit growth and an extended period of deleveraging. There is also a risk that the current slowdown in economic activity in other EMEs could be more severe and protracted than the Bank has projected. In particular, the anticipated normalization of monetary policy in the United States could trigger larger capital outflows, tighter credit conditions and increased volatility in EME asset prices. Important structural reforms, which are necessary to expand potential growth, could also be delayed. The shock would be transmitted to the Canadian economy through weaker export sales, lower commodity prices and a deterioration in our terms of trade.