Two major issues dominate the analysis and policy discussion in this Monetary Policy Report: the nature and extent of the global economic slowdown that began late last year and the consequences of the terrorist attacks in the United States. Together, these factors have made the economic outlook considerably more uncertain than usual.
 
The global nature of the economic slowdown that began in the United States in the second half of last year became increasingly evident through the summer of 2001. Although Japan had already been experiencing a period of protracted weakness, it was only around mid-year that evidence began to indicate that worldwide economic activity was slowing rapidly.
 
The US slowdown has its roots in several factors. These include the earlier tightening of monetary policy, the sharp rise in world energy prices, and the adjustments resulting from excess production and additions to capacity in the information and telecommunications sectors. This last factor - a classic investment cycle - has been a much stronger force than was initially recognized.
 
The economic consequences of the horrific events of 11 September are very difficult to assess. There has been a clear and immediate impact, particularly in North America, on transportation, finance, and tourism. But the size and duration of the effects are hard to gauge accurately. Even more problematic are the implications for consumer and business attitudes. While history offers some benchmarks, these events are unparalleled in North America. Only with additional time and data will the consequences of these events become more fully understood.
 
In this Report, we analyze the factors behind the global economic slowdown that was evident prior to 11 September (taking into account the implications of significant revisions to US GDP and productivity data). We also provide the Bank's first assessment of the potential consequences of the terrorist attacks for the North American economy through 2002. While preliminary and subject to a wide band of uncertainty, this analysis will guide our reasoning and our judgment, as more data become available, about the implications for the Canadian economy, inflation, and monetary policy.
 
Since last February, core CPI inflation has risen to slightly above the midpoint of the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control target range. At the same time, the rate of increase in the total CPI has come down towards core inflation, primarily reflecting reductions in gasoline prices.
 
Core inflation rose above 2 per cent in April and hovered around 2.3 per cent through the spring and summer, somewhat higher than projected in the May Report. Other statistical measures of the trend rate of inflation were either the same or slightly lower than the core rate, suggesting that the underlying trend of inflation is unlikely to be above the core rate.
 
The rise in core inflation above 2 per cent is consistent with the lagged effects of an economy that was still operating just above capacity earlier this year. The increase in the core rate was also magnified by the fact that the level of core inflation had been held down temporarily early this year as a result of increased price discounting by motor vehicle manufacturers and dealers and by a special provincial credit program for electricity customers in British Columbia.
 
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI peaked at 3.9 per cent in May, boosted by a jump in natural gas prices (resulting from earlier tight supplies and the end of an Alberta government assistance program) and by a temporary surge in gasoline prices. Since then, the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI has fallen sharply, moving down towards core inflation. In September, the 12-month rise in the CPI was 2.6 per cent. This marked decline in total CPI inflation towards the core rate reflects the partial reversal of previous energy-price increases. The prices of both fuel oil and gasoline fell over this period, primarily as a result of reductions in crude oil prices. As well, a buildup in natural gas inventories since early 2001 led to a large reduction in prices at the producer level, which contributed to an easing in the year-over-year rate of increase in natural gas prices at the consumer level since mid-year.
 
While recent declines in the prices of energy commodities are starting to contribute to a more moderate rate of increase in consumer energy prices, and therefore in the total CPI, the estimated pass-through of higher energy costs to the non-energy components of the total CPI is continuing - about 0.1 per cent over the past year. To date, this effect has been most evident in airfares, local transportation costs, and the prices of fruits and vegetables. Both core and total CPI inflation also appear to have been affected to some degree by the pass-through of increased costs for imported goods and services over the past year, partly resulting from the depreciation of the Canadian dollar during that period.
 
The prices of non-energy commodities have, on balance, decreased considerably since mid-April. In particular, slowing world economic growth has led to a further reduction in the prices of metals, pulp, newsprint, and livestock. In the case of lumber, the imposition of a countervailing duty on exports of softwood lumber to the United States resulted in a surge in prices paid by US consumers, which has largely been reversed. For exporters of lumber, the price, net of duty, has decreased.
 
The slowing in Canada's economic expansion since the third quarter of 2000, to a rate well below the economy's growth potential, largely reflects the marked easing in growth of demand in the US economy. Economic activity in the United States slowed abruptly after mid-2000, with the four-quarter growth of real GDP falling from 5.2 per cent in the second quarter of 2000 to 1.2 per cent in the second quarter of 2001. In Canada, four-quarter growth in real GDP decreased from 4.8 per cent in the second quarter of 2000 to 2.1 per cent in the second quarter of 2001. Although economic growth in Canada was somewhat stronger than that in the United States over this period, the reduction in US growth had a substantial adverse effect on the pace of Canada's expansion, given the close trade linkages between the two countries.
 
The slowdown in the pace of US economic activity has continued well into the second half of 2001, with few concrete signs of a rebound. The retrenchment in business investment, especially spending on high-technology equipment, has been particularly pronounced and more protracted than had been anticipated. September's terrorist attacks and their aftermath have had a further significant negative impact on the US economy.
 
Economic growth in Canada in the third quarter of 2001 was also weaker than anticipated. The unexpectedly sharp downturn in US capital expenditures and a significant easing in economic growth outside North America have been key negative factors for the Canadian economy. As a result, Canadian shipments and manufacture of telecommunications products, computers, and other electronic equipment have declined considerably from the very high levels reached at the end of last year. Moreover, despite production cutbacks, inventory levels in these particular manufacturing industries remained much higher than normal at mid-year, and as a result, further reductions are likely over the remainder of the year. Canadian exports and production of automotive products, pulp and paper, and chemical products have also been adversely affected by the US economic slowdown. Inventory imbalances in these last two industries will contribute to additional downward pressure on output over the near term.
 
At the same time, growth in final domestic demand in Canada has weakened over the past year. The growth of household spending has been on a softening trend, reflecting the slowing in real income growth, recent job losses, and an associated decline in consumer confidence. In addition, capital spending by Canadian firms has been edging down since the fourth quarter of 2000 in response to increasing excess production capacity, particularly in the telecommunications area.
 
The negative effects of the terrorist attacks have exacerbated these weakening trends in the Canadian economy. Our best estimate is that the disruption of activity in various sectors in Canada, particularly finance and transportation, reduced the growth rate of Canadian real GDP in the third quarter of 2001 by about 1 percentage point. Combined with an already weak picture, this suggests that growth in the third quarter was probably slightly negative and will likely be near zero in the fourth quarter.
 
Several measures indicate that pressures on production capacity eased significantly during the first three quarters of 2001. The Bank's most recent estimates of its conventional measure of potential output and the output gap suggest that the Canadian economy began to operate below its production capacity in the third quarter of 2001. The unemployment rate has risen somewhat since mid-2000, and the marked reduction in the help-wanted index over this period, together with the reduction in employment since May 2001, points to weaker labour demand as the source of the increase in unemployment. The Bank's most recent survey of firms also suggests that capacity pressures and labour shortages have diminished appreciably since the beginning of the year. This easing in pressures on product and labour markets has been broadly based across the country.
 
Despite this evidence, a number of other indicators suggest that conditions remained tight in certain product and labour markets in the first three quarters of this year. Skilled workers, particularly in the energy and health-care sectors, remained in short supply. Vacancy rates for industrial property were again very low in the third quarter of 2001, and office vacancy rates, while rising, were below average. New, unoccupied housing units were also in very short supply.
 
Overall, the slowing in economic activity since the last quarter of 2000 has substantially reduced demand pressures. On balance, the available evidence suggests that the economy was in excess supply in the third quarter.
 
Based on the average hourly earnings of permanent workers, the underlying rate of increase in average labour compensation appears to have moved down to about 2.75 per cent in the third quarter of 2001, from about 3.5 per cent in the second half of 2000.
 
The year-over-year rise in labour compensation in the business sector eased between the second quarter of 2000 and the second quarter of 2001. Meanwhile, growth in labour productivity remained modest in the first half of 2001 because of the slowdown in economic growth. With these rates of increase of compensation and productivity, the year-over-year increase in unit labour costs in the business sector was 2.3 per cent in the second quarter of 2001.
 
The Bank of Canada has lowered its target for the overnight rate by 300 basis points since the beginning of the year. This includes five cuts totalling 200 basis points since the May Report (on 29 May, 17 July, 28 August, 17 September, and 23 October). The first two cuts, of 25 basis points each, were made in the context of a gradual slowing in economic growth in Canada that resulted from declining US growth. With the subsequent recognition that the slowdown in both external and domestic aggregate demand was likely to be deeper and more protracted than earlier anticipated, especially following the terrorist attacks of 11 September, the pace of interest rate reductions picked up. The last three interest rate reductions - of 25, 50, and 75 basis points, respectively - brought the target for the overnight rate down to 2.75 per cent. The objective of these actions was to buttress demand and to bolster business and household confidence, as economic prospects weakened and the outlook for the future rate of inflation eased.
 
All of the interest rate changes, except that of 17 September, were made on the pre-announced dates. The 17 September action, between scheduled dates, was an extraordinary measure taken in the wake of the terrorist attacks in the United States. It, like similar actions in other countries, was aimed at underpinning consumer and business confidence in the aftermath of the attacks. The Bank of Canada also provided additional liquidity to the banking system immediately after the 11 September attacks to ensure the orderly functioning of financial markets.
 
In the United States, the Federal Reserve has lowered its target for the federal funds rate by 400 basis points in total since the beginning of the year, 250 basis points of which have been the result of actions taken since the completion of the May Report. The latter included two recent 50-basis-point cuts, one announced on 17 September, subsequent to the terrorist attacks, and one on 2 October in recognition of the continued weak trends in the US economy. With these moves, the federal funds target has been lowered to 2.5 per cent.
 
The more pessimistic economic outlook since midsummer has contributed to a downward shift and steepening in the yield curve in Canada and in the United States. The view that the North American economic recovery was delayed generated expectations of more policy easing, which are embodied in short-term interest rates. It may also have reduced the inflation component incorporated in long-term rates, since long-term bond yields have fallen in both Canada and the United States.
 
The positive interest rate differential between yields on Canadian and US government bonds decreased through the summer months amid growing signs that the economic slowdown would affect Canada more than the market had previously expected. Since 11 September, however, the differential has widened again, as investor preference for US government securities in times of global uncertainty has led to lower yields on longer-term US Treasury bonds compared with the yields on the longer-term bonds of other countries.
 
Since the May Report, the Canadian dollar has fluctuated between US$0.6324 and US$0.6636. In the spring and early summer, support for the Canadian dollar came in part from market expectations that the economic slowdown would be relatively less pronounced in Canada than in the United States. More recently, the weaker state of the world economy and the resulting reduction in commodity prices, the deceleration in Canadian economic activity, and the global economic uncertainty caused by the terrorist attacks have contributed to weakness in the Canadian dollar.
 
In response to the events of 11 September, the US dollar initially weakened against major world currencies, continuing the depreciating trend that had begun in June. However, as markets re-evaluated the relative cyclical positions of the world's major economies, the US dollar subsequently recovered beyond its pre-attack level.
 
Monetary conditions have eased considerably since the May Report - the combined result of interest rate declines and depreciation of the exchange rate. The index reached -9.91 on 22 October, down from -8.0 in the last Report.
 
Since the May Report, credit conditions have tightened for businesses because of the deterioration in the economic outlook and the increase in uncertainty, particularly after the 11 September attacks. In the bond market, this tightening has been reflected in the increase in spreads between the interest rates on corporate debt and those on government debt. Moreover, whereas earlier in the year, only a few sectors, such as telecommunications and automotive manufacturing, had been affected, more industries are now feeling the effects of the tighter credit conditions.
 
In spite of this tightening, the growth of business credit has picked up since the May Report because of the increased demand for funds. This increase is related to the desire of firms to hold additional liquidity in the context of heightened economic uncertainty. Household credit continues to show solid growth.
 
Between late May and early September, the Toronto Stock Exchange experienced a sizable decline, falling by over 12 per cent. This slide mirrored the downturn of the Dow Jones Industrial Average , which fell about 15 per cent over the same period. These drops reflected the deterioration of the profit outlook as the global economic slowdown became more evident. Both of these stock markets fell more than 10 per cent in the 10 days following 11 September but subsequently recovered by a substantial amount.
 
Beyond their immediate tragic consequences, the terrorist attacks in the United States have introduced a great deal of uncertainty into the world economy. Prior to the attacks, the slowdown in global economic growth had already become quite pronounced, as other industrialized and emerging-market economies increasingly began to show more clearly the effects of weaker growth in the United States and the global contraction in the telecommunications and information technology sectors. While the terrorist actions have accentuated the slowing in global activity in the very near term, it is very difficult to assess how long-lasting the negative effects will be.
 
This uncertainty is critical to the assessment of the economic outlook. The performance of the global economy will depend importantly on geopolitical developments and on the effects that the attacks have on confidence. Economic forecasts in this environment are subject to a much higher degree of uncertainty than usual. Rather than presenting a conventional forecast in these circumstances, we will present the Bank's working assumptions and the economic scenario that they generate. These assumptions will be updated as new information becomes available.
 
The Bank's first working assumption is that there will be no further major escalation of terrorism. Against this background, consumer and business confidence can reasonably be expected to recover, although the timing and pace of this recovery are highly uncertain. The Bank's second working assumption is that the lingering sense of insecurity will continue to weigh on consumer and business confidence in North America through the first half of next year, but that confidence will then stabilize and recover to normal levels in the second half of 2002.
 
In the United States, economic growth had come to a standstill during the first half of 2001. Although some slowing to a more sustainable pace had been desirable, the slowdown was deeper and more prolonged than initially expected. To an important extent, this deceleration reflected the sharp turnaround in the growth of investment spending (which had been a key element in the US expansion). Investment in the technology sector was hit particularly hard. Industrial production also fell as firms strove to bring stock levels into line with demand. At the same time, consumer spending and housing expenditures continued to advance, albeit at a slower pace.
 
Deteriorating conditions in the US labour market during the summer, together with other indicators, suggested that the pickup in growth in the second half of the year would be more gradual than earlier expected. Against an already weak outlook for the second half of 2001, the near-term disruptions created by the terrorist attacks have led the Bank to expect US economic growth to be negative in both the third and fourth quarters. With growth in the first half of 2001 averaging only 1.2 per cent, this implies growth on an annual average basis for 2001 of only about 1 per cent (about 0 per cent for the four quarters to 2001Q4) - close to the consensus forecast.
 
When we look ahead to 2002, there are several factors, including significant declines in interest rates, that should help to underpin growth. The US Federal Reserve moved quickly to reduce official interest rates in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks. In addition, the stimulative fiscal measures introduced earlier this year, as well as increased government expenditures and proposed tax reductions following the attacks, will boost personal incomes and demand in the United States. And, prior to 11 September, the inventory correction had progressed considerably and was nearing completion in some areas, such as the automotive sector. With the assumption that confidence recovers to normal levels in the second half of 2002, the significant amount of monetary and fiscal stimulus that has been provided over the past year is expected to support a relatively strong rebound in economic activity. Hence, following weak growth in the first half of 2002, growth in the second half is projected to move up above the growth rate of potential output (of about 3 per cent). On an annual average basis, this scenario implies a growth rate in 2002 of just about 1 per cent, which is also close to the consensus forecast. This weak annual growth rate is heavily influenced by the expected contraction in economic activity in the second half of 2001. Indeed, on a fourth-quarter-over-fourth-quarter basis, growth in 2002 would be much stronger, at 2.7 per cent.
 
Weaker growth in the United States relative to earlier expectations, together with heightened levels of uncertainty in global markets, will also adversely affect other industrialized economies. In that context, all major central banks have lowered interest rates to support demand. In Europe, the spillover effects from the US slowdown in investment spending, along with the effects of weaker domestic demand, were already being increasingly felt prior to the attacks in September. The technology sectors were experiencing a particularly severe adjustment. In Japan, economic problems have continued unabated since the May Report, largely because efforts to revive the economy are constrained by underlying structural difficulties, including ongoing problems in the financial sector. In view of recent developments, growth in the major European economies in 2001 is expected to slow to around 1.5 per cent on an average annual basis, while economic activity in Japan is expected to decline by about 0.5 per cent. Growth prospects have also deteriorated further in the economies of emerging-market countries, although contagion from the financial difficulties in Argentina and Turkey has remained relatively limited.
 
In line with the global economic slowdown, the US-dollar price of non-energy commodities is projected to decline somewhat further over the next few months. Thereafter, non-energy commodity prices are expected to recover gradually.
 
Crude oil prices are likely to be volatile but, on balance, they are expected to remain below US$25 per barrel in coming months. Natural gas prices, having fallen considerably since early 2001, are likely to recover somewhat through the winter heating season. These assumptions for crude oil and natural gas prices are consistent with current expectations in futures markets.
 
In Canada, economic growth in the second half of 2001 is expected to be close to zero or slightly negative. Canadian exports likely declined still further in the second half of 2001, primarily as a result of the expected reduction in US aggregate economic activity. The growth of household expenditures in the second half of 2001 will no doubt be held back by recent and prospective job losses, the substantial reduction in equity prices, and the increased uncertainty resulting from the terrorist attacks. In the current highly uncertain world economic and political climate, Canadian businesses are also expected to remain cautious. Capital spending is likely to be substantially cut in those industries where a significant amount of excess capacity has emerged or where the medium-term outlook for demand has been revised down as a result of the terrorist attacks. Further growth in energy investment over this period will also likely be tempered by the impact on cash flow of the recent sharp reduction in natural gas prices.
 
Since growth is expected to be close to zero or slightly negative in the second half of 2001, annual average growth for 2001 would be about 1.5 per cent. This is down from the range of 2 to 3 per cent projected in both the May 2001 Report and the August Update. The average private sector forecast is for growth in Canada's real GDP of 1.4 per cent for 2001 (Consensus Economics 2001). At the time of the May Report, the consensus outlook called for growth of 2.4 per cent in 2001.
 
The performance of the Canadian economy in 2002 will depend critically on the global environment in general and on the timing and strength of the US recovery in particular. The Bank's working assumption is that household and business confidence in the United States and Canada will recover to normal levels in the second half of next year in the absence of further major geopolitical shocks. In this scenario, a second-half US recovery will increase demand for Canadian exports. As confidence rebuilds, the considerable amount of monetary stimulus in place, together with recently announced increases in government spending and previously announced tax cuts, is expected to support strong growth in domestic spending. Rebounds in domestic and foreign demand should support a recovery in business investment with a lag. The Bank's survey of businesses carried out in September suggested, however, that investment spending would likely edge down over the next year, reflecting the high level of uncertainty regarding the outlook for sales. In this scenario, growth is expected to remain relatively weak in the first half of 2002 - about 2 per cent at an annual rate - before rising to about 4 per cent in the second half of 2002 (above the estimated growth rate of potential output of about 3 per cent). On an annual average basis, this implies growth for 2002 of about 1.5 per cent. This is comparable to the average private sector forecast of 1.7 per cent growth for 2002, down from 3.3 per cent at the time of the May Report.
 
In the regular survey reported in the Conference Board of Canada's autumn Index of Business Confidence, 72 per cent of respondents expected prices, in general, to rise over the next 6 months at a rate of 2 per cent or less, and 96 per cent expected a rate of 3 per cent or less. The latest survey of firms conducted by the Bank's regional offices also confirms that inflation expectations are firmly anchored inside the Bank's inflation-control target range. The average private sector forecast for the rate of increase in the total CPI is 2.0 per cent in 2002 (slightly lower than last spring). As well, the differential between 30-year conventional and Real Return bonds is close to 2 per cent. Typical forecasts of longer-term inflation are 2.0 to 2.1 per cent, depending on the time horizon.
 
The pass-through of increased energy costs to the non-energy components of the CPI is likely to continue, although this effect is expected to be modest and to be spread over several years.
 
Assumptions about the prices of crude oil and natural gas will, however, continue to significantly affect the near-term outlook for consumer energy prices and therefore for the total CPI. If crude oil prices remain below their early-September price of US$27 per barrel for the remainder of this year, gasoline and fuel oil prices will likely remain below year-earlier levels. In addition, the 12-month rate of increase in natural gas prices at the consumer level is expected to ease further over the next 6 months.
 
The increase in costs arising from the depreciation of the Canadian dollar since the beginning of 2000 may continue to put some upward pressure on inflation over the next year and a half. Earlier episodes of large changes in the exchange rate during the 1990s, characterized by low exchange rate pass-through to the CPI in Canada and in many other industrial countries, suggest that these effects should be limited.
 
With the recent easing in labour market pressures, wage gains are expected to slow through 2002. Indeed, the Bank's latest survey of businesses shows that significantly fewer firms are expecting wage increases to rise than was the case at the end of 2000.
 
With stronger productivity gains anticipated after the start of the economic recovery, increases in overall unit labour costs should be moderate.
 
While remaining relatively high, the rates of growth of the three narrow money aggregates, M1, M1+, and M1++, have slowed significantly from the beginning of the year. Much of the decline, particularly in the case of gross M1, was due to the decreasing importance of special factors such as an earlier jump in the deposits of financial institutions held at banks, which had boosted the growth of the narrow aggregates relative to that of underlying transactions balances.
 
Part of the reason why growth in the narrow aggregates remained relatively strong over the period has been increased demand for money for precautionary purposes. In the face of heightened stock market uncertainty and concerns over future income, firms and individuals may be choosing to hold a higher level of liquid deposits for precautionary purposes. Tighter credit conditions in some sectors may also increase the desire for higher levels of liquidity. To the extent that these balances are used to purchase financial assets rather than goods and services once uncertainty is reduced, they are not an indication of immediate inflationary pressures.
 
In September, growth in narrow money increased sharply largely because of temporary factors associated with the terrorist attacks, which induced a large number of businesses and households to increase their liquidity and delay reinvestment of funds.
 
The forecast for real GDP growth in 2002, based on narrow money growth, is between 2 and 2.5 per cent. And the Bank's model based on narrow money predicts that core inflation will fall to near the midpoint of the inflation-control target range over the next 6 months.
 
Growth in M2++ has also slowed since the beginning of the year, in line with falling contributions to mutual funds. The growth rate of M2++ increased in September, due primarily to a sharp rise in narrow money and increased interest in money-market mutual funds. Historical data for M2++ have been revised, owing to the adoption of a more reliable data source for contributions to mutual funds. The new data result in a more moderate rate of growth in 2001 and early 2002 than was previously estimated. M2++ is currently growing at a rate that is broadly consistent with inflation of around 2 per cent.
 
The Canadian economy is judged to have moved into excess supply in the third quarter of 2001. In the scenario based on the Bank's working assumption, real output growth is not projected to exceed potential growth until the second half of 2002. Therefore, excess supply continues to build through to mid-2002, putting downward pressure on core inflation over this period. This influence is expected to be tempered by longer-term inflation expectations that remain close to 2 per cent and by current and projected increases in unit labour costs that are also in this range.
 
Under the working assumptions, the Bank would expect core inflation to move below 2 per cent in early 2002 and to fall to about 1 1/2 per cent in the second half of the year. The degree of economic slack is expected to start shrinking in the second half of 2002 and to disappear through 2003. Thus, by the end of 2003, core inflation should move back close to the 2 per cent midpoint of the target range.
 
If world energy prices remain at or below their early-September levels, the rate of increase in the total CPI is projected to fall to close to 2 per cent by the end of this year and to move below the midpoint of the target range in 2002. Under this assumption for energy prices, total CPI inflation would be below core inflation in 2002. Total CPI inflation is also expected to move back up towards the 2 per cent midpoint in late 2003.
 
During this past summer, evidence had begun to accumulate that the economic slowdown in North America would be deeper and last longer than had previously been expected. In particular, the effects from the ongoing global retrenchment in the information and telecommunications sectors had become a much stronger force than was initially recognized.
 
The events of 11 September and their fallout around the world have added a further major element of weakness and uncertainty to the near-term prospects for the global economy and for Canada. How quickly levels of activity recover and economic growth resumes will depend crucially on geopolitical developments and on how soon consumer and business confidence in the United States and Canada return to normal.
 
One can construct a scenario where confidence is restored quickly and, given the amount of monetary and fiscal stimulus that has been provided, robust growth resumes early in 2002. On the other hand, consumer and business confidence in North America could stay weak for quite some time, in which case growth would remain sluggish through most of 2002.
 
In coming to its decision to further reduce the target for the overnight interest rate on 23 October, the Bank operated on the basis of the working assumptions presented in this Report. These assumptions are that there will be no further major escalation of terrorism and that confidence will recover to normal levels in the second half of 2002.
 
Based on this analysis, the Bank now expects downward pressure on inflation to persist through much of next year, with core inflation falling to about 1 1/2 per cent in the second half of 2002. The 75-basis-point cut in the Bank's key policy rate on 23 October, which, together with previous declines, has brought the target overnight rate down to 2.75 per cent, aims to support economic growth and keep inflation close to our 2 per cent target over the medium term.
 
While subject to an unusually wide band of uncertainty, the outlook presented in this Report will guide the Bank's judgment about the appropriate course for monetary policy as more information on the economy becomes available.