The profile for global economic growth has improved since January. Europe is expected to emerge slowly from recession in the second half of 2012, although the risks around this outlook remain high. The profile for US growth is slightly stronger, reflecting the balance of somewhat improved labour markets, financial conditions and confidence on the one hand, and emerging fiscal consolidation and ongoing household deleveraging on the other. Economic activity in emerging-market economies is expected to moderate to a still-robust pace over the projection horizon, supported by an easing of macroeconomic policies. Improved global economic prospects, supply disruptions and geopolitical risks have kept commodity prices elevated. In particular, the international price of oil has risen further and is now considerably higher than that received by Canadian producers. If sustained, these oil price developments could dampen the improvement in economic momentum.
 
Overall, economic momentum in Canada is slightly firmer than the Bank had expected in January. The external headwinds facing Canada have abated somewhat, with the US recovery more resilient and financial conditions more supportive than previously anticipated. As a result, business and household confidence are improving faster than forecast in January. The Bank projects that private domestic demand will account for almost all of Canada's economic growth over the projection horizon. Household spending is expected to remain high relative to GDP as households add to their debt burden, which remains the biggest domestic risk. Business investment is projected to remain robust, reflecting solid balance sheets, very favourable credit conditions, continuing strong terms of trade and heightened competitive pressures. The contribution of government spending to growth is expected to be quite modest over the projection horizon, in line with recent federal and provincial budgets. The recovery in net exports is likely to remain weak in light of modest external demand and ongoing competitiveness challenges, including the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar.
 
The Bank projects that the economy will grow by 2.4 per cent in both 2012 and 2013 before moderating to 2.2 per cent in 2014. The degree of economic slack has been somewhat smaller than the Bank had anticipated in January, and the economy is now expected to return to full capacity in the first half of 2013.
 
As a result of this reduced slack and higher gasoline prices, the profile for inflation is expected to be somewhat firmer than anticipated in January. After moderating this quarter, total CPI inflation is expected, along with core inflation, to be around 2 per cent over the balance of the projection horizon as the economy reaches its production potential, the growth of labour compensation remains moderate and inflation expectations stay well anchored.
 
Despite recent improvements to the outlook for the global and Canadian economies, risks remain elevated.
 
The three main upside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the possibility of higher-than-expected oil prices, stronger-than-expected growth in the US economy and stronger momentum in Canadian household spending.
 
The two main downside risks to inflation in Canada relate to a reintensification of sovereign debt and banking concerns in Europe, and the possibility that growth in Canadian household spending could be weaker than projected.
 
Overall, the Bank judges that the risks to the inflation outlook in Canada are roughly balanced over the projection period.
 
Reflecting all of these factors, on 17 April, the Bank maintained the target for the overnight rate at 1 per cent. In light of the reduced slack in the economy and firmer underlying inflation, some modest withdrawal of the present considerable monetary policy stimulus may become appropriate, consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target over the medium term. The timing and degree of any such withdrawal will be weighed carefully against domestic and global economic developments.
 
Recent developments point to a somewhat stronger profile for global economic growth than was expected at the time of the last Report. The heightened uncertainty around the global outlook has eased from very high levels, but volatility can be expected to persist. Economic conditions in the United States have improved, and policy initiatives to address the sovereign debt and banking crisis in the euro area have resulted in some improvement in European debt markets and global financial conditions.
 
The global economy continues to face significant challenges, however. Overall, global economic growth is projected to moderate in 2012 to 3.2 per cent and to recover to 3.4 per cent in 2013 and 3.8 per cent in 2014. Despite the positive impact of recent policy initiatives, the euro area is still expected to experience a recession lasting until the third quarter of 2012, followed by a sluggish recovery, with fiscal austerity, bank deleveraging and weak confidence continuing to weigh on growth. The US economic expansion is projected to continue at a moderate pace through 2014, owing to the restraining effects of household deleveraging, fiscal consolidation and continuing negative spillover effects from the European crisis. Economic activity in emerging-market economies is expected to moderate over the projection horizon, albeit to a still-robust pace, supported by some easing in macroeconomic policies. Improved prospects for global economic growth and supply-side disruptions have kept global commodity prices elevated, particularly for crude oil, where prices also incorporate a geopolitical risk premium related to tensions in the Middle East. This is expected to have a slight dampening effect on global economic momentum.
 
In response to modest underlying inflation pressures, central banks in advanced economies have maintained policy rates at historically low levels, and a few have engaged in further quantitative easing. Central banks in a number of emerging-market economies have continued to reverse past policy tightening in light of slowing prospects for domestic economic growth.
 
Conditions in global financial markets have improved, on balance, since the release of the January Report. The measures taken in Europe to address the sovereign debt and bank funding crisis, as well as stronger growth prospects in the United States, have led to an improvement in market sentiment over this period. The tone in markets was also boosted by the US stress tests, which showed that the largest US banks would retain sufficient capital to withstand an extremely adverse macroeconomic scenario. More recently, however, concerns about the sovereign debt positions of some euro-area peripheral economies, especially Spain, have reintensified, and investor confidence has diminished somewhat.
 
European policy-makers have taken a number of initiatives over the past year to improve financial stability and confidence. They have agreed on a second financial program for Greece in conjunction with substantial private sector debt relief, raised the requirement for core Tier 1 capital ratios for banks, adopted a new Fiscal Compact and increased the financial back-stop for euro-area members from €500 billion to €700 billion.  In addition, the European Central Bank has provided approximately €1 trillion in liquidity to banks in the region through two longer-term refinancing operations and loosened collateral requirements. As a result, funding conditions for European financial institutions have improved. With the exception of Spain, yields on euro-area government bonds have fallen, with sovereign spreads over German bonds declining. Taken together, these developments suggest that the near-term risk of a severe bank liquidity crisis in the euro area has decreased.
 
Government bond yields in most major advanced economies have fluctuated noticeably since the release of the January Report. Following an initial rise in reaction to improved prospects for global economic growth, yields have reversed most of their gains, owing to the deterioration in market sentiment in the past few weeks. In particular, German bond yields have fallen to record lows. Equity prices have fallen modestly in Europe since the last Report, reflecting renewed concerns over the debt situation, but have improved in most other economies. Global corporate bond spreads have narrowed, particularly for financial and high-yield issuers, and yields on US investment-grade corporate bonds recently touched all-time lows. In this shifting environment, corporate bond issuance has recovered strongly since the beginning of the year, with both financial and non-financial firms taking advantage of better access to primary markets.
 
Despite the generally improved tone in financial markets since January, banks in the euro area have continued to tighten borrowing conditions for households and firms. Developments in Europe have also had an impact on bank lending conditions in the United States. Foreign banks operating in the United States have tightened approval standards on loans to US corporations, while both US and foreign banks tightened conditions on loans to banks headquartered in Europe and to non-financial firms with significant exposures to European economies.
 
While the ECB's expanded liquidity operations have not by themselves directly improved the underlying health of bank balance sheets, they have created space for the restructuring of these balance sheets to proceed at an orderly pace. Pressures on funding conditions from bank deleveraging in the euro area are thus expected to persist, but to be less intense than anticipated at the time of the January Report.
 
The euro area entered a recession in the fourth quarter of 2011, with real GDP contracting by 1.2 per cent, as expected. However, recent economic conditions have improved slightly. Business and consumer confidence have recovered modestly, and purchasing managers' indexes suggest that the pace of output contraction is likely to ease somewhat in the first half of 2012.
 
The divergences in economic conditions between the core and peripheral euro-area economies are striking. The unemployment rate in Germany remains close to post-unification record lows, while unemployment rates in Spain, Portugal and Greece are at record highs. Indicators such as unit labour costs suggest that the peripheral economies have made limited progress in narrowing their competitiveness gap with the core economies. In light of continued economic weakness, some peripheral economies face considerable challenges in implementing the extensive fiscal adjustments and deep structural reforms required to restore competitiveness and ensure sustainable fiscal positions.
 
The euro area is projected to be in recession through the third quarter of 2012 as fiscal consolidation, bank deleveraging, tight financial conditions and negative confidence effects lead to a significant drop in domestic demand. A modest recovery in economic activity is projected to begin in the second half of 2012, supported by a pickup in export growth in response to a gradual strengthening in external demand. Domestic demand is projected to grow modestly beginning in 2013, boosted by a gradual easing in financial conditions and an improvement in confidence. Relative to the January Report, the ongoing recession is expected to be somewhat shallower, owing to smaller-than-anticipated negative effects from both bank deleveraging and weak confidence levels. Growth prospects over the remainder of the projection horizon, however, are similar to expectations in January.
 
Increases in commodity prices and a rise in indirect taxes and administered prices from fiscal consolidation brought total inflation in the euro area to 2.6 per cent in March. Inflation pressures are expected to moderate over the projection horizon, however, in response to considerable excess capacity.
 
US real GDP grew by close to 2.5 per cent in the second half of 2011, from less than 1 per cent over the first half of the year, and recent economic developments have been largely positive. On average, monthly employment gains have strengthened since the fourth quarter of 2011, and consumer and business confidence have shown more resilience than expected. The assessment of the fundamentals for household spending is now stronger, owing to upward revisions to personal income over the second half of 2011, while the recent increase in equity prices has boosted household net worth. The spillover effects of the euro-area crisis on US financial conditions and confidence are likely to be smaller than expected. As a result, the profile for US economic growth is stronger over the projection horizon than was anticipated in the last Report, despite the negative effects of higher oil prices.
 
Notwithstanding this stronger outlook, US real GDP is projected to grow at a relatively modest pace through the first half of 2013, dampened by fiscal consolidation and continued household deleveraging. Economic activity is expected to strengthen more noticeably thereafter as the impact of these factors dissipates. On balance, growth in real GDP is projected to rise from 2.3 per cent in 2012, to 2.5 per cent in 2013 and 3.6 per cent in 2014.
 
Monetary conditions are expected to remain very accommodative: the US Federal Reserve recently extended, through to at least late 2014, its guidance regarding the period during which economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate. In contrast, fiscal consolidation is expected to exert a significant drag on US economic growth, amounting to roughly 1 percentage point in 2012, 2.5 percentage points in 2013 and one-half percentage point in 2014, similar to expectations at the time of the January Report. This projected fiscal drag includes the winding down of stimulus programs introduced during the recession, the expiration of payroll tax reductions at the end of 2012 and sequestration cuts starting in 2013. The projected increase in US real GDP growth between 2013 and 2014 is highly contingent on the expected profile for fiscal policy.
 
The recovery in consumption spending is projected to remain quite modest by historical standards as households rebuild their balance sheets in an environment of persistently weak housing prices, fiscal consolidation, modest gains in employment and elevated oil prices.
 
Residential investment remains very weak. Recent growth partly reflects an increase in the construction of apartment buildings, as high unemployment and tight mortgage credit conditions have led to a shift in demand away from home ownership toward renting. The inventory of vacant houses and the pending supply of foreclosures remain near recent record-high levels and are restricting the construction of new homes, as well as putting downward pressure on house prices. High vacancy rates and tight credit conditions have also been restraining the growth of non-residential construction. Both residential and non-residential construction are projected to remain at low levels, although some gradual improvement is expected over the projection horizon, supported by the reduction in the overhang of unsold houses, a gradual easing in borrowing conditions and a stronger economy.
 
Exports and business investment in equipment and software are expected to provide important support to US economic growth over the projection horizon. Notwithstanding the dampening effects from low rates of resource utilization, business investment is projected to grow at a healthy pace through 2014, supported by solid corporate balance sheets, strong earnings and the low cost of capital. Although the growth of exports is expected to slow somewhat in 2012, owing to the recent appreciation of the US dollar and a deceleration in foreign demand, it should rebound over 2013-14 as global demand recovers.
 
Given the modest pace of US economic growth, excess supply conditions are expected to recede only gradually over the projection horizon. As a result, underlying inflation pressures are projected to remain subdued.
 
In Japan, real GDP fell by 0.7 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2011 as supply-chain disruptions from the flooding in Thailand, as well as the high level of the yen and faltering external demand, caused a sharp decline in exports. With rapid restoration of these supply chains, indicators suggest that growth in Japan resumed at a modestly positive pace in the first quarter of 2012. Over the projection horizon, real GDP growth is projected to average around 1.7 per cent per year, supported by the continued rebuilding of infrastructure. Although exports are expected to grow only modestly in 2012, they are projected to gather momentum beginning in 2013, as global demand rebounds. With inflation well below the recently announced goal of 1 per cent, the Bank of Japan decided to increase the size of its Asset Purchase Program by ¥10 trillion, or about 2 per cent of GDP, through government bond purchases.
 
Real GDP growth in China in the first quarter moderated to 8.1 per cent on a year-over-year basis, as a result of lower external demand and the effects of previous tightening in monetary and macroprudential policies. Activity in the housing sector has slowed, causing house prices to retreat from the recent peak reached in August 2011. Growth in exports has decelerated more abruptly, in response to weaker demand from Europe, which accounts for around one-fifth of Chinese exports. Consumer price inflation in China stood at 3.6 per cent in March 2012, well below its recent peak of 6.5 per cent in July 2011, owing in large part to rapidly moderating food price inflation. With inflation pressures easing, monetary policy is becoming more accommodative. Chinese authorities have reduced the reserve requirement ratio by 100 basis points since December, and further easing is expected.
 
Growth in China's real GDP is projected to average approximately 8 per cent per year through 2014, similar to expectations at the time of the January Report. A modest appreciation of China's real exchange rate and the government's announced plan to boost household spending are expected to support a gradual rotation of demand away from exports and investment and toward consumption. Nevertheless, global imbalances remain a concern and are projected to stay elevated over the projection horizon.
 
Real GDP growth in other emerging-market economies is also projected to decelerate in 2012, driven primarily by slowing external demand, past policy tightening and pressures on financial conditions from international bank deleveraging in some countries. However, economic growth is expected to gain momentum over 2013-14, as the growth of exports to advanced economies recovers. Growth prospects for these economies have been revised upward relative to the January Report, owing to stronger foreign demand, somewhat easier financial conditions and higher commodity prices, which benefit many commodity producers in this group.
 
Global commodity prices have generally stayed at elevated levels, but have moved in somewhat different directions over the past few months. Heightened geopolitical tensions in the Middle East, together with supply disruptions in some jurisdictions and an improvement in the outlook for global economic activity, have combined to push Brent crude oil prices above the levels anticipated at the time of the January Report. Prices for West Texas Intermediate crude oil, in contrast, are little changed compared with their levels at the time of the January Report, owing to abundant supply conditions in the US Midwest. As a result, the spread between Brent and WTI crude oil prices has widened to approximately US$20 per barrel. Based on the latest futures curve, prices for both Brent and WTI are projected to remain firm in the near term, declining thereafter in response to the normalization of global supply conditions. Oil prices are projected to be higher than expected at the time of the last Report, consistent with a more optimistic assessment of demand prospects.
 
North American prices for natural gas have fallen, as cuts in production have failed to offset the impact of unseasonably warm weather. The latest futures curve suggests that natural gas prices will rise through 2014 as natural gas gains market share as an input for the generation of electricity, but prices are nevertheless projected to remain at relatively low levels, below the profile anticipated in the January Report.
 
Prices of non-energy commodities have increased over the past few months, supported by improved global demand, as well as supply concerns in agricultural markets. While prices for agricultural products are expected to decline over the projection horizon as supply conditions improve, prices for forestry products are projected to rise gradually, in line with a modest recovery in the US housing sector. Metals prices are expected to remain at current levels until the end of 2013, before rising in 2014 owing to stronger global economic growth.
 
External demand for Canada's exports remains weak. The foreign activity measure has recovered only half of the decline experienced during the last recession, owing largely to protracted weakness in the US housing sector. This measure is expected to steadily expand over the projection horizon, as the composition of external demand becomes more favourable to Canadian exports, surpassing its pre-recession level in the second half of 2013. The projected profile of the activity measure is somewhat stronger than was anticipated in the January Report, in line with the upward revision to the US economic outlook.
 
Higher global commodity prices typically have positive wealth and income effects on the Canadian economy through improved terms of trade. However, the Bank of Canada's commodity price index has declined since January, owing largely to the relatively high weight of natural gas prices in the index. Moreover, although global oil prices have risen sharply since January, the prices received by Canadian producers of crude oil have declined. As a result, Canada's terms of trade have deteriorated. Going forward, the BCPI and the terms of trade are projected to rise through 2014, reflecting some recovery in natural gas prices, continued increases in non-energy commodity prices, and an expected narrowing in the spread between Canadian export and import prices for crude oil.
 
The Canadian dollar has averaged close to 101 cents US since the March fixed announcement date and is assumed to remain at this level over the projection horizon, compared with the 98 cents US assumed in the January Report.
 
The Bank expects the Canadian economy to grow at a moderate pace over the projection horizon, with total and core CPI inflation remaining close to the 2 per cent target. The Bank continues to anticipate that the economic expansion will be driven by growth in private domestic demand over the projection horizon. Net exports are expected to contribute only marginally to overall growth, reflecting the modest recovery in foreign activity and Canada's ongoing competitiveness challenges, including the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar.
 
Economic momentum in Canada is slightly firmer than the Bank had expected in the January Report. The external headwinds facing the Canadian economy have abated somewhat, with the US economic recovery showing more resilience than previously anticipated and financial conditions more supportive than expected. Furthermore, with confidence having rebounded more quickly than envisaged in January, the Bank expects that global uncertainty will have less of a dampening effect on the spending of Canadian households and businesses in coming quarters.
 
The aggregate supply and price of credit to businesses and households in Canada remain very stimulative, providing important ongoing support to the economic expansion.
 
Credit conditions for Canadian firms began to ease again in the first quarter, as reported in both the Bank's Senior Loan Officer Survey and the Business Outlook Survey , in the context of improved global financial conditions.
 
Financial markets in Canada have maintained a positive tone in recent months in the face of fluctuations in Europe. Yields on Canadian government bonds are just above the low levels seen at the time of the January Report, having moved generally in line with major foreign markets. Corporate yields have also remained at very low levels, and the volume of bond issuance has increased. These favourable developments are partly due to sustained international demand for the debt of Canadian governments, banks and corporations, a sign that their credit quality is perceived to be high by global standards. While the S&P/TSX Composite Index has declined slightly since the January Report, the prices of Canadian bank equities, which had performed better than those of other advanced economies during a period of heightened uncertainty last year, have risen further.
 
In this context, Canadian banks continue to be well positioned to lend, with ready access to relatively low-cost funding across the term structure in both Canadian and foreign currencies. The growth of business credit has picked up somewhat in recent months, consistent with some easing in credit conditions and a pickup in the growth of business investment. However, given their strong aggregate financial position, non-financial corporations continue to have a limited need for external financing.
 
Household credit also remains readily available at near-record low rates, owing in large part to exceptionally low long-term fixed mortgage rates. The pace of household credit growth has moderated in recent months, however, following a long period of comparatively rapid growth that has pushed household indebtedness to record levels relative to disposable income.
 
As confidence in Canada has improved in recent months, growth in the narrow monetary aggregates has moderated, consistent with a reduced preference for liquidity. Growth in the broad monetary aggregates has also eased modestly of late, while remaining consistent with expectations of relatively subdued inflation pressures.
 
The slack in the Canadian economy is now estimated to be less than previously expected, since the level of real GDP in the first quarter of 2012 is estimated to be 0.3 per cent higher than the Bank had forecast in the January Report. This reflects the combination of an upward revision to reported GDP growth in the third quarter of 2011, an upwardly revised estimate of 2.5 per cent growth for the first quarter of 2012, and fourth-quarter growth of 1.8 per cent, which was broadly in line with expectations in the January Report. On balance, these results reflect greater momentum in household consumption and business investment in Canada, as well as stronger-than-anticipated foreign activity. The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap, at -0.4 per cent in the first quarter of 2012, also points to less slack in the economy than previously expected. This is consistent with responses to the Bank's Business Outlook Survey in recent quarters, which have shown that the proportion of firms that would have difficulty responding to an unexpected increase in demand has remained close to its historical average.
 
Developments in labour market indicators have been consistent with the persistence of a slightly greater degree of excess supply. Despite notable improvements in March, both employment and the unemployment rate are little changed, overall, from their levels six months ago. Similarly, the proportion of involuntary part-time workers has only partially recovered from its sharp rise during the recession, pointing to the persistence of unused capacity in the labour market. The proportion of firms reporting labour shortages in the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey also remained below its historical average.
 
On balance, the Bank judges that the economy was operating at roughly half a per cent below its production capacity in the first quarter of 2012, a smaller degree of slack than had been anticipated in the January Report.
 
The Bank expects a moderate pace of expansion to continue over the projection horizon. On an average annual basis, real GDP is forecast to grow by 2.4 per cent in both 2012 and 2013, before moderating to 2.2 per cent, the rate of the economy's production potential, in 2014. Private domestic demand, supported by accommodative domestic financial conditions, is expected to account for almost all of Canada's economic growth over the projection horizon.
 
This outlook for the Canadian economy is slightly firmer than in the January Report, with greater momentum through 2012 than had been anticipated, although the projected pace of growth in 2013 is now somewhat more modest than previously envisaged. The stronger quarterly profile over most of 2012 partly reflects more positive sentiment than previously assumed, in line with the stronger US and global economic outlook.  The profile for growth in consumption and investment is more front-loaded than previously expected, in part reflecting a more rapid improvement in confidence. The rise in global oil prices since the January Report is not, however, expected to provide a further boost to domestic demand through higher real incomes, since the prices received by Canadian producers have gone down, while those paid by Canadian consumers have gone up. Nonetheless, the recent greater momentum in private domestic demand is forecast to result in a higher profile for imports than in January, offsetting the more positive contribution to economic growth of stronger foreign activity and stronger Canadian exports in this projection.
 
Growth in household expenditures (the combination of consumer spending and residential investment) has picked up in recent quarters, and is expected to continue at a moderate pace through 2014. The Bank continues to expect consumption to grow at a rate that is slightly below the projected moderate growth in personal disposable income, resulting in a slight rise in the savings rate. Growth in residential investment, which is currently supported by very favourable mortgage-financing conditions, is forecast to slow over the projection horizon. Nonetheless, the ratio of household expenditures to GDP is expected to remain relatively high over the projection horizon. In that context, the ratio of household debt to income is projected to rise further.
 
The Bank continues to expect robust growth in business fixed investment over the projection horizon, reflecting the strong financial positions of Canadian firms, favourable credit conditions, high commodity prices and the strong Canadian dollar, as well as the impetus to improve productivity amid heightened pressures to become more competitive. This robust outlook for growth in investment broadly maintains the share of investment in GDP around its historical average. The projected profile for business fixed investment has been revised up from the January Report, particularly for 2012, reflecting a stronger and less uncertain global economic outlook. This forecast is consistent with Statistics Canada's survey on private and public investment intentions, which points to strong growth in 2012 led by the oil and gas sector, and with the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey, which indicates that investment intentions over the next 12 months remain strongly positive.
 
The contribution of government spending to real GDP growth is expected to be quite modest over the projection horizon, in line with the fiscal plans of federal and provincial governments to consolidate spending, as outlined in recent budget statements. In this regard, significant downward revisions to National Accounts estimates of government spending in recent quarters suggest that the unwinding of the temporary fiscal stimulus measures implemented during the recession was largely completed by the end of 2011. In light of these developments, the Bank assumes a somewhat lower overall profile for government expenditures over the projection horizon than in the January Report.
 
The recovery in net exports is expected to remain weak. With low levels of US demand for autos and housing, coupled with ongoing competitiveness challenges, Canada's exports are not forecast to regain their pre-recession peak until the end of 2013. In contrast, the level of imports has already regained its pre-recession peak. Partly as a result, Canada's current account balance has declined from a pre-recession surplus to a deficit of approximately 2 per cent of GDP, which is projected to persist over the forecast horizon.
 
With a somewhat stronger external environment and slightly more momentum in domestic demand, both exports and imports are expected to rise at a somewhat faster pace than anticipated in the January Report, although the Bank continues to expect that net exports will contribute little to Canada's GDP growth over the projection horizon.
 
Overall, real GDP in Canada is projected to grow at a slightly faster pace than the estimated growth rate of potential output in coming quarters. As a result, the economy is anticipated to gradually return to full capacity by the first half of 2013, earlier than expected in the January Report. In this context, the Canadian economy is forecast to operate with somewhat less slack throughout the projection horizon than indicated in the January base-case scenario, largely reflecting the slightly higher level of economic activity seen recently.
 
Core CPI inflation averaged 2.2 per cent over January and February, up slightly from 2.1 per cent in the fourth quarter. As anticipated, the gradual increase from 1.5 per cent in the first half of 2011 partly reflected the lagged effects of higher world prices for agricultural products on the prices of food and clothing, as well as the dissipation of the effect of the introduction of the harmonized sales tax in Ontario and British Columbia in the third quarter of 2010 on year-over-year core inflation. This upward movement in core inflation has also been reflected in alternative measures of underlying inflation. Despite higher core inflation, total CPI inflation has declined from its peak of 3.4 per cent in the second quarter of 2011 to an average of 2.6 per cent in January and February. This drop reflects some moderation in gasoline prices from levels seen a year ago, as well as the unwinding of the direct effects of the HST on year-over-year inflation. However, with the rebound in gasoline prices in recent months, total CPI inflation has remained higher than expected in the January Report.
 
Inflation expectations remain well anchored. The April Consensus Economics forecasts for total CPI inflation in 2012 and 2013 were 2.1 per cent and 2.0 per cent, respectively. As reported in the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey, over 90 per cent of firms expect average inflation over the next two years to remain within the 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range. Market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations also continue to be consistent with the 2 per cent inflation-control target.
 
Core inflation is projected to stay close to 2 per cent over the projection horizon, as the economy remains near its production potential, the growth of labour compensation remains moderate and inflation expectations stay well anchored. The Bank forecasts a slight decline in core inflation in the near term, reflecting the unwinding of the effects of higher prices for food and clothing on year-over-year inflation, as well as lower electricity prices. Core inflation is expected to converge to 2 per cent thereafter as excess supply is fully absorbed. As well, the indirect effects associated with the announced restoration of the provincial sales tax in British Columbia are expected to provide a modest temporary lift to core inflation, beginning in the second quarter of 2013. Underlying inflation is somewhat firmer than in the January Report, owing largely to reduced economic slack.
 
Total CPI inflation is also projected to decline in the near term to close to 2 per cent, in part reflecting lower core inflation, and to remain around the target over the balance of the projection horizon. The Bank no longer expects total CPI inflation to move significantly below 2 per cent later in 2012. This reflects slightly firmer underlying inflation and, more importantly, the fact that the higher prices for gasoline observed recently (primarily because of higher prices for Brent crude oil, Box 1) are expected to be more persistent.
 
This projection includes a gradual reduction in monetary stimulus over the projection horizon, consistent with achieving the inflation target.
 
The uncertainty surrounding the Bank's inflation projection is illustrated using fan charts. Chart 35 and Chart 36 depict the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the second quarter of 2012 to the end of 2014.
 
Despite recent improvements to the outlook for the global and Canadian economies, risks remain elevated. Significant steps have been taken to address the sovereign debt and banking crisis in the euro area, reducing the chances of an extreme negative event, but risks in this regard still rest clearly on the downside.
 
The three main upside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the possibility of higher-than-expected oil prices, stronger-than-expected growth in the US economy and stronger momentum in Canadian household spending.
 
Global inflationary pressures could be more persistent than currently projected if oil prices continue to rise and remain above the levels implied by current futures prices.
 
Private sector demand in the United States could be stronger than anticipated, and fiscal policy could exert a smaller-than-anticipated drag on growth, if US authorities smooth the path of fiscal consolidation following the November elections.
 
Household expenditures in Canada have been stronger than expected and could have more momentum than currently projected.
 
The two main downside risks to inflation in Canada relate to a reintensification of sovereign debt and banking concerns in Europe, and the possibility that growth in Canadian household spending could be weaker than projected.
 
Although policy initiatives to address the sovereign debt and banking crisis in the euro area have resulted in some improvement in European debt markets and global financial conditions, this risk could re-escalate, affecting Canada through financial, confidence and trade channels.
 
Continuing high household debt levels in Canada could lead to a sharper-than-expected deceleration in household spending. Relatedly, if there were a sudden weakening in the Canadian housing sector, it could have sizable spillover effects on other areas of the economy.
 
Overall, the Bank judges that the risks to the inflation outlook in Canada are roughly balanced over the projection period.