Over the last six months, most countries have continued to register strong economic growth. Recoveries have taken hold in many emerging-market countries, and the Japanese economy, while still fragile, is showing more consistent evidence of sustained expansion. In the euro area, growth has continued at a strong pace. The US economy has also remained robust, but increases in official interest rates have contributed to some recent slowing.
 
The other major development internationally has been the sharp rise and volatility in world oil prices. Higher energy prices have already pushed up headline inflation rates in most countries and are likely to moderate the pace of economic expansion somewhat both this year and next.
 
The combination of strong global demand and increased likelihood that oil prices will remain above previously expected levels has heightened the risk that inflation rates in major industrial countries will continue to move up. The prospect of higher inflation has already prompted many central banks to increase official interest rates.
 
In Canada, output growth in the first half of 2000, at a rate of about 5 per cent, exceeded expectations. Despite this robust expansion, the trend of inflation has continued to come in below expectations. While there are signs that the economy has begun to slow, the momentum of demand is still expected to increase pressures on capacity and to raise core inflation to the midpoint of the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent target range, but this is now expected to occur later in 2001.
 
In this environment, there are three main areas of uncertainty for Canada's economic outlook: demand growth in the United States, the current level and prospective growth of Canada's production capacity, and world energy prices. Continued robust expansion of US demand for Canadian exports could lead to inflationary pressures here. However, recent productivity gains and brisk investment in machinery and equipment raise the possibility that the economy's production potential may be higher than that incorporated into the Bank's outlook. Finally, the longer energy prices remain high, the greater the risk that they could feed into the prices of other goods and services and into inflation expectations.
 
While the inflation-control target range is specified in terms of the total consumer price index , for the purpose of policy implementation the Bank uses the CPI excluding food, energy, and the effect of changes in indirect taxes - the core CPI -  as its operational guide. Since last March, core CPI inflation has remained in the lower half of the Bank's inflation-control target range and somewhat below the level projected in the May Report. At the same time, because of further substantial increases in energy prices, the rate of increase in the total CPI has continued to be well above that of core inflation.
 
The 12-month rate of increase in the core CPI was 1.3 per cent in September, compared with 1.5 per cent in March. Other statistical measures of the trend rate of inflation continued to bracket the core rate.
 
The persistent, unexpectedly low level of core inflation is still concentrated in the prices of durable and semi-durable goods. The prices of these import-intensive items fell over the past year, despite modest increases in the prices of imported non-energy consumer goods. This suggests that the phenomenon of a reduced pass-through of changes in the exchange rate to consumer prices is continuing. Competitive pressures in the retail sector have also remained intense and have contributed to discounting - especially on motor vehicles and household appliances. More generally, the resulting negative surprise in core inflation is also consistent with the continued presence of some slack in product markets during the first half of the year.
 
Although core CPI inflation has remained stable, the rate of increase in the total CPI has fluctuated between 2 per cent and 3 per cent over the past six months. Both the variability and the net upward movement in the rate of increase in the total CPI largely reflect surging energy prices. Strong growth in the global demand for oil, together with only modest increases in world production, has resulted in sharply higher oil prices. This has pushed up the retail prices of both gasoline and fuel oil. A jump in natural gas prices at the producer level has also contributed to a marked rise in prices at the consumer level.
 
Despite these broad-based energy-price increases, the first-round effects of higher energy costs on the core CPI remain small, and there is no evidence of second-round effects from inflation expectations. The effect of the energy price increases on the level of the core CPI is estimated to have been less than 0.2 per cent since the end of 1998 and less than 0.1 per cent over the past year. This increase largely reflects first-round cost-based effects on the prices of interurban transportation. The phenomenon of low pass-through, also evident in the effects of exchange rate changes on the core CPI, may partly reflect the increased credibility of low-inflation policies.
 
After rising considerably in 1999 and into early 2000, the prices of non-energy commodities have eased since the beginning of May, in spite of the continued strong expansion of the global economy. The appreciation of the US dollar against major currencies has been an important factor impeding further recovery in the US dollar price of many commodities. Moreover, ample supplies have led to a decline in the prices of agricultural commodities. Lumber prices have also come under considerable downward pressure, because of slower growth in US construction activity and excess capacity in the industry.
 
The substantial gains in the prices of Canada's energy commodity exports over the past year, together with the increase in the prices of non-energy commodities through to the end of the first quarter of 2000, largely explain why the annual increase in the chain price index for GDP (a broad price measure of the goods and services produced in Canada) remained well above that of core inflation at mid-2000. Federal pay-equity payments also boosted the level of the chain price index for GDP by about 0.6 per cent in the second quarter.
 
After a gain of 5.8 per cent at an annual rate in the second half of 1999, Canada's real GDP rose at 4.9 per cent in the first half of 2000. Thus, while growth eased slightly, it was still strong and well above the growth of potential output. This growth in economic activity was led by increases in exports and in business investment in machinery and equipment. For the third quarter of 2000, current information points to continued robust growth in a range of 3.5 to 4.5 per cent.
 
After growing rapidly in the first half of 2000, the US economy slowed in the third quarter. Although growth of investment in equipment and software fell from the levels seen in previous quarters, it remained strong.
 
With solid US aggregate demand and the favourable competitive position of Canadian industry, growth in Canada's exports, particularly shipments of high-technology equipment, remained buoyant in the first half of 2000. A further expansion in the volume of commodity exports also contributed to growth. Early information suggests that exports expanded less rapidly in the third quarter.
 
High levels of consumer confidence and further gains in real disposable income supported household spending in Canada, which continued to grow substantially in the first two quarters of 2000, although at a slower pace than in the second half of 1999. In particular, expenditures on interest-sensitive items such as housing and motor vehicles fell back in the first half of the year. Information to date, however, suggests that spending on these big-ticket items recovered in the third quarter. The increase in real personal income was supported by further gains in employment and by the one-time effect of the federal pay-equity settlements.
 
Capital expenditures by businesses rose rapidly in the first six months of this year, supported by further marked gains in profitability and high levels of confidence. Spending on machinery and equipment continued to soar, with growth in the first half of the year averaging over 23 per cent at an annual rate, up from the 16 per cent rate registered in the second half of 1999. This sustained increase in investment reflects the continued surge in demand for computers and related high-technology equipment.
 
Spending on structures, especially by the oil and gas sector, also rose considerably in the first half of this year. Early indicators for the third quarter of 2000 point to further robust investment growth.
 
Against a background of vigorous demand, inventory investment edged down in the first half of 2000, suggesting that some of this strength was unanticipated.
 
Imports continued to expand sharply in the first six months of 2000, chiefly because of the heavy business investment in machinery and equipment. Imports of industrial materials also rose considerably because of the marked increase in output needed to meet buoyant export demand.
 
Since imports rose somewhat less than exports, the trade surplus was up slightly in volume terms. The terms of trade increased still further, largely because of rising energy prices. Thus, the current account balance (in dollar terms) improved considerably in the first half of this year, averaging a surplus of 1.7 per cent of GDP. Preliminary data suggest that the current account position in the third quarter of 2000 likely remained strong, with further gains in the terms of trade offsetting a reduction in the real trade balance.
 
Wage developments are particularly important when monitoring changes in aggregate costs, since labour costs account for more than half of total costs. According to available indicators, wages appear to have increased by about 3 per cent in the first half of 2000. Given recent growth in labour productivity, the underlying rise in labour costs remains consistent with core inflation staying well within the inflation-control target range.
 
The year-over-year increase in the average hourly wage (excluding overtime) for permanent workers was 3.5 per cent in the third quarter of 2000, up from 3.0 per cent in the fourth quarter of 1999. Another broad measure of wage change, the underlying year-over-year increase in labour income per person-hour, was about 3 per cent in the second quarter of 2000. The average annual wage increase in the unionized private sector was 2.3 per cent in the first eight months of 2000, down slightly from the average gain of 2.6 per cent last year.
 
Labour productivity, as measured by output per person-hour, strengthened considerably in the first half of 2000, increasing by over 2.5 per cent from the second quarter of 1999 to the second quarter of 2000. The substantial gains in business expenditures on machinery and equipment in recent years may be starting to affect the trend rate of labour productivity growth. This improvement in the growth of output per worker helped hold the increase in unit labour costs (excluding the effect of the federal pay-equity settlements) at mid-year to just over 1 per cent on a year-over-year basis.
 
The latest data provide a more optimistic assessment of the current level and prospective growth of potential output. At the time of the May Report, various indicators suggested that the Bank's conventional estimate of potential output may have been underestimating the actual amount of aggregate capacity in the Canadian economy. The most recent update of this measure of potential output now suggests that the Canadian economy was operating slightly below capacity output at the end of 1999, instead of close to three-quarters of one per cent above its production capacity, as indicated in the last Report.
 
Nonetheless, the revisions to the conventional measure now suggest that the economy may have moved into a position of excess demand in the first half of 2000, since aggregate output growth continued to outstrip the estimated expansion of capacity.
 
As always, it must be emphasized that there is a large degree of uncertainty around these estimates of the output gap. And since the conventional measure adjusts with a lag, it carries an upside risk at times of increased technological change. Adding to this risk is the surge in investment in computer and information technology since 1996 and the more intense restructuring of Canadian businesses in the 1990s. Therefore, the Bank follows a broad range of capacity indicators.
 
Some of these other indicators suggest that there was still slack in product markets during the first six months of this year. Chief among them is the fact that core inflation has been lower than expected. Furthermore, the ratio of unfilled orders to shipments in the manufacturing sector was largely unchanged over the past year and is below the level reached in 1998. In addition, robust growth in labour-force participation appears to be increasing the supply of labour as fast as demand, and underlying increases in unit labour costs have remained low.
 
A number of other indicators are more consistent with the view that the economy has now moved into excess demand. The measured rate of capacity utilization in the non-farm, goods-producing sector in the second quarter of 2000 was above the level reached in the late 1980s. There have also been reports of shortages of skilled labour, especially in the engineering, construction, transportation, and hospitality sectors. And there is a risk that, because of the increased credibility of low-inflation policies, pressures on capacity may now take longer to be reflected in actual price and wage developments.
 
Overall, the weight of the evidence does not confirm the view that the economy had moved into excess demand by mid-year, but it points to an economy that is operating close to full capacity.
 
On 17 May, soon after the release of the May Report, the Bank of Canada raised the Bank Rate by 50 basis points to 6 per cent. This action was deemed necessary to keep the future trend of inflation near the midpoint of the Bank's target range of 1 to 3 per cent so that the Canadian economy could continue to grow at a sustainable rate. Since November 1999, the Bank Rate has risen by 125 basis points from the 4.75 per cent level maintained through much of last year.
 
The Bank's action in May, which followed a similar move by the US Federal Reserve, was prompted by concerns about future pressure on capacity limits arising from strong international and domestic demand for Canadian products. Since the United States is a major source of demand for Canadian exports, the Fed's action in response to rapid growth in that economy underscored the continued risk that US demand and inflation pressures could spill over into Canada. The Bank's decision to follow the Fed's move reflects the current similarities in cyclical conditions in the two countries, particularly the strong growth rates of aggregate demand. There are, nevertheless, some significant differences between the two. Since core inflation is lower in Canada than in the United States and since our economy has not been growing as quickly, or for as long, as theirs, the target for the Canadian overnight rate remains 75 basis points below the US target rate for federal funds.
 
The timing and magnitude of policy rate increases in both countries had been widely expected in financial markets, so that most of the rise in 90-day commercial paper rates occurred prior to the central bank actions. Since then, 90-day paper rates have declined slightly, and financial market participants now generally expect rates to remain steady over the next few months. Market participants interpret recent data as indicating that the US economy is slowing down, and they appear to believe that productivity gains will raise potential growth in both countries, reducing the need for further interest rate hikes.
 
North American bond yields declined following the central bank moves, as tighter monetary conditions reduced the perceived risk of an increase in inflation. More recently, rising uncertainty in global financial markets has pushed US yields down relative to Canadian yields, and Canada/US spreads have turned slightly positive for maturities of 5 to 10 years. While actual and anticipated reductions in government debt continue to put downward pressure on long-term government bond yields, the inversion of the yield curve for longer-term bonds is slightly less pronounced than it was at the time of the May Report. The yield curve for Canadian corporate bonds, which has been less affected by the reduced supply of government debt, continues to have a normal positive slope.
 
The Canada/US exchange rate has generally fluctuated between 65.3 and 68.3 cents since the May Report. The Canadian dollar has been affected by shifts in market expectations concerning the relative strength of the Canadian and US economies, the prospects for Canada/US interest rate differentials, and the recent volatility in global financial markets. Recent weakness in the prices of non-energy commodities may also have negatively affected the Canadian dollar. However, a low and stable inflation environment, the strength of real GDP, and the large current account surplus recorded in the second quarter have provided support to the Canadian dollar. The US dollar has remained strong against most major currencies, as the US economy continues its robust growth with low inflation and substantial productivity gains. More recently, it strengthened further, as nervous global investors have sought out US assets. The Canadian dollar has also risen strongly against most other major currencies, gaining about 5 per cent against the British pound sterling since the beginning of the year and about 12 per cent against the euro.
 
During most of the past six months, the Bank's monetary conditions index fluctuated in a range of -5.5 and -5.0. More recently, it has been in the -5.5 to -6.0 range, reflecting the fluctuation of the Canadian dollar against the US dollar.
 
Beginning in December, the Bank is adopting a new system of pre-set dates for implementing Bank Rate changes. The new system will improve the implementation and effectiveness of monetary policy by focusing attention on Canadian economic conditions and fostering a better understanding of central bank decisions.
 
Our analysis suggests that core CPI inflation in Canada will gradually rise and reach the midpoint of the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent target range in the second half of next year. Assuming that world oil prices do not rise further from the high levels observed in recent months, the annual rate of increase in the overall CPI is expected to decline gradually towards the 2 per cent mark over that period. However, several key uncertainties surround this projection.
 
Since mid-1999, global economic growth has become more synchronized and is showing strong momentum. This development is tilting the balance of risks towards greater inflation pressures and could lead to increases in policy-determined interest rates in some countries. Higher energy prices have not yet had a significant impact on world output growth. The longer energy prices remain high, however, the more likely it is that they will adversely affect growth in countries dependent on oil imports. High energy prices also add to the inflation risk through their possible effect on inflation expectations in some countries. On the other hand, credibility gains made by various monetary authorities in recent years should help reduce this risk.
 
The recovery of many emerging-market economies from the 1997-98 financial crisis continues. Strong increases in the volume of exports, particularly to the United States, initially accounted for much of the recovery in these economies. More recently, however, domestic demand has strengthened significantly.
 
In the euro area, the pace of real GDP growth stabilized at about 3.5 per cent in the first half of 2000, and activity is expected to remain solid in coming quarters as domestic demand firms and the depreciation of the euro exerts a stimulative effect on exports. The Bank expects real GDP growth in the euro area to be around 3.5 per cent in 2000 and 3 per cent in 2001.
 
The Bank of Japan raised its target for the overnight interest rate to 0.25 per cent in August, thus moving away from its "zero-interest-rate policy." The reduction in monetary stimulus was motivated by the surge in output growth in the first half of 2000 led by strong business investment and buoyant demand for Japanese exports. The Japanese economy is still fragile, however: the financial sector requires further restructuring, and household spending remains weak. Japan's recovery could be particularly affected by high oil prices because of its dependence on imported oil. The Bank expects real GDP growth in Japan to be about 2 per cent in 2000 and 1.5 per cent in 2001.
 
Although the momentum of aggregate demand in the US economy remains strong, recent data indicate that overall growth has slowed, particularly in housing and non-residential construction. While past interest rate increases are expected to further moderate growth, the high level of economic activity and a tight labour market continue to pose an inflationary risk. Real GDP growth in the United States is expected to be about 5 per cent in 2000 and 3.0 to 3.5 per cent in 2001. While higher oil prices could further reduce US real GDP growth, they could also prompt higher interest rates if inflation expectations are affected.
 
Even with modest recourse to the US strategic petroleum reserve, crude oil prices are expected to remain relatively firm through the winter but may ease as warmer weather arrives. Prices for non-energy commodities are expected to move up, in line with growth in global demand.
 
Economic prospects for the United States are an important element in the economic outlook for Canada. In particular, growth in Canadian exports is expected to ease over the next 18 months, in line with the projected slowing of the US expansion. Reduced stimulus from the earlier depreciation of the Canadian dollar, as well as the recent weakness in non-energy commodity prices, should also act in the same direction. Nonetheless, both the growth and level of exports are expected to remain high. The strength in energy prices may also contribute to slower growth in the manufacturing sector, but could boost investment, exploration, and exports by energy producers.
 
Household spending in Canada is expected to grow at a robust pace, supported by favourable labour market conditions and recent decreases in personal income tax rates. Recent equity market volatility and the effects of higher energy prices on disposable incomes could, however, temper spending plans.
 
The growth of business investment is expected to fall back from the very strong pace recorded over the past several quarters, but should continue to contribute strongly both to aggregate demand and to the economy's capacity to produce. Import growth is also expected to ease, chiefly reflecting less rapid increases in exports and in the demand for investment goods.
 
The most recent consensus among private sector forecasters is for real growth in Canada's GDP (on an annual average basis) of 4.7 per cent for 2000 and 3.5 per cent for 2001. At the time of the May Report, the consensus forecast called for growth of 4.1 per cent in 2000 and 3.1 per cent in 2001.
 
With the upward revision to growth in the second half of 1999 and the relatively strong performance of the economy in the first half of this year, the Bank expects Canada's output growth in 2000 to be close to 5 per cent. For next year, the Bank sees output growth in Canada in a range of 3 to 4 per cent. This is higher than the projected range for growth in potential output - 2.75 to 3.25 per cent. This outlook implies that the Canadian economy would continue to take up remaining slack in the second half of this year and could move into excess demand in late 2000 or early in 2001. The outlook, however, also incorporates a profile of decelerating output growth through 2001, consistent with the projected slowdown of the US economy.
 
When projecting the balance between demand and supply for 2001, there is uncertainty not only about the current level of potential output, but also about the growth rate of future production capacity. While the growth of potential output could ratchet up if the benefits of new information and communications technology spread through a wide range of Canadian industries, the Bank is inclined to take a cautious approach to projecting a higher trend rate of potential growth.
 
Public expectations about the increase in the CPI over the near term have risen slightly as a result of higher energy prices. To date, however, this has not significantly affected longer-term inflation expectations, which remain close to 2 per cent.
 
The Conference Board reported in its autumn Index of Business Confidence that 49 per cent of its regular business survey respondents expected prices, in general, to increase over the next six months at a rate of 2 per cent or less, and 92 per cent expected a rate of 3 per cent or less. These percentages are down from a year ago, particularly for respondents expecting inflation of 2 per cent or less. The downward movement implies that expectations of short-term inflation have increased and are now centred closer to the midpoint of the Bank's target range. The average private sector forecast for the rate of increase in the total CPI is 2.7 per cent in 2000 (up from 2.3 per cent last spring) and 2.4 per cent in 2001 (up from 2.1 per cent last spring). Typical forecasts of longer-term inflation remain between 1.8 and 2.1 per cent, depending on the time horizon.
 
The differential between conventional bonds and Real Return Bonds has remained close to 2 per cent. The supply factors affecting bond markets have made it difficult to extract reliable information from this measure. It therefore cannot be inferred that long-term inflation expectations are exactly at the level implied by the differential. Nevertheless, the differential does suggest that investors are confident that there will not be a long-run pickup in inflation.
 
The impact on the core CPI of this year's substantial hike in crude oil prices is still predicted to be small. So far, the price effects have been largely restricted to air fares and local transportation costs. While the risk of further pass-through of these higher costs to other components of the core CPI has increased because of their persistence, their effect is still expected to be modest. Competition in the retail sector is likely to remain strong, and firms may try to economize on the use of energy.
 
Assumptions about crude oil prices, however, significantly affect the near-term outlook for the total CPI. If crude oil prices are about US$30 per barrel for West Texas Intermediate by year-end, the year-to-year rise in the total CPI should ease to about 2.5 per cent in the first quarter of 2001. By comparison, prices of US$35 per barrel and US$25 per barrel would imply a year-over-year increase in the CPI of about 3.4 per cent and 1.7 per cent, respectively, in the first quarter of 2001.
 
Wage increases are expected to be in line with productivity growth and projected inflation. The Bank's September survey of industry associations suggests that wage increases will rise over the next 12 months. The implications of higher wage growth for unit labour costs should be offset, to some extent, by rising growth in labour productivity, with the rate of increase in unit labour costs rising to a level consistent with projected inflation.
 
Asset prices tend to be sensitive to expectations of inflation and economic growth. In the late 1980s, for example, a surge in housing prices preceded an upturn in core inflation.
 
In 1999, housing prices moved up noticeably, but there are some indications that activity in the housing market may be easing, partly in response to the increase in interest rates that has taken place since November 1999. The year-over-year rise in prices for existing homes (based on the Royal LePage index) was 5.1 per cent in the second quarter, down slightly from the rate observed at the end of 1999. On the other hand, the year-over-year increase in new home prices rose a little further to 2.4 per cent in August, largely because of higher costs for labour and construction materials.
 
Growth in the narrow money aggregates has slowed somewhat in recent months from the very rapid pace recorded in early 2000, but it remains strong on a year-over-year basis. Year-over-year growth in gross M1 was about 17 per cent in September. Part of this strength, however, stems from factors that raised the growth of M1 relative to that of underlying transactions balances. Most notable in early 2000 was the increase in bank deposits of financial intermediaries. As Technical Box 5 explains, our best estimate of the growth in underlying transactions balances is about 6 to 8 per cent.
 
Growth in M1+ and M1++ also remains robust on a year-over-year basis at 10 per cent and 8 per cent, respectively, but at a considerably lower rate than that of M1. These aggregates are influenced, to some extent, by some of the special factors affecting M1.
 
When the special factors are taken into account, the recent pace of expansion in narrow money suggests that real GDP will grow at a rate of around 3.75 per cent in 2001. This is broadly consistent with the Bank's overall projection. The growth in narrow money aggregates also suggests that core inflation will be moving up to the midpoint of the target range towards the end of 2001.
 
The pace of expansion in the broad aggregate M2++ has been relatively stable over recent months. Year-over-year growth in September was 8.3 per cent. Growth in M2++ suggests a similar profile for core inflation as that implied by the narrow aggregates, consistent with inflation remaining within the target range.
 
Consumer credit continues to grow moderately, consistent with the outlook for sustained growth in consumer spending. Total business credit has slowed over recent months but remains in line with continued strength in business activities in the near term.
 
Overall, the information coming from money and credit indicators is consistent with continued strength in real output and some pickup in core inflation.
 
A number of forces are expected to contribute to an upward movement in core inflation over the next year. First, longer-term inflation expectations continue to be close to 2 per cent - more than one-half per cent above the current level of core inflation. Second, with output growth projected to remain vigorous, capacity pressures in product and labour markets are expected to become more evident. Third, wage increases are moving up.
 
The Bank therefore expects core inflation to rise gradually to 2 per cent in the second half of the next year. If output growth through 2001 slows to a rate more consistent with the growth of potential output, as expected, core inflation should stabilize at about 2 per cent. But there is some risk that the economy could grow more rapidly and move into a more persistent excess-demand situation next year, leading to further upward pressure on inflation.
 
Recent hikes in crude oil and natural gas prices are expected to keep the rate of increase in the total CPI close to 3 per cent for the rest of this year. If oil prices were to stabilize at levels just below US$30 a barrel, the rate of increase in the total CPI would be expected to move down to about 2 per cent by the end of 2001.
 
During the past six months, the Canadian economy has continued to expand briskly, outstripping expectations. The rise in energy prices has pushed up the total CPI, but core inflation has remained stable, in the lower half of the Bank's target range for inflation control, and below projected levels.
 
These developments suggest that the economy still had a margin of unused capacity in the first part of this year, and have led the Bank to raise its estimate of both the current level and the prospective growth of the production potential of the Canadian economy.
 
While there are signs that the economy has begun to slow, the momentum of demand is still expected to increase pressures on capacity. Specifically, the Bank expects output growth to average close to 5 per cent this year and to slow to a range of 3 to 4 per cent in 2001. As a result, core inflation is projected to rise to the 2 per cent midpoint of the Bank's target range in the second half of 2001. To keep core inflation steady at 2 per cent, the economy would have to grow on average at a rate equal to the growth of capacity in subsequent years.
 
The main risks to this outlook relate to demand, supply, and inflation expectations. On the demand side, there is the possibility that continued robust growth of US demand for Canadian exports at a time of strong domestic demand could increase inflation pressures in Canada. The rapid growth of M1 adds to this concern. On the supply side, there is a chance that the strength of spending on machinery and equipment and the recent improvement in productivity gains may raise capacity limits beyond currently projected levels. However, the Bank will continue to take a cautious approach to projecting potential output, updating its estimates as evidence accumulates. With respect to inflation expectations, there is a risk that higher energy prices may feed into the prices of other goods and services and into expectations of future inflation.
 
In these circumstances of strong economic expansion, high levels of economic activity relative to capacity, and increased energy prices, the challenge for monetary policy will be to judge the balance between aggregate demand and supply, to guard against the risk that higher energy prices could affect core inflation and expectations of future inflation, and to adjust monetary conditions in a timely manner so as to preserve the low trend of inflation that has been benefiting the Canadian economy.