The global economic expansion is proceeding broadly as projected in April, with modest growth in major advanced economies and robust expansions in emerging economies. The US economy has grown at a slower pace than expected and continues to be restrained by the consolidation of household balance sheets and slow growth in employment. While growth in core Europe has been stronger than expected, necessary fiscal austerity measures in a number of countries will restrain growth over the projection horizon. The Japanese economy has begun to recover from the disasters that struck in March, although the level of economic activity in that country will remain below previous expectations. In contrast, growth in emerging-market economies, particularly China, remains very strong. As a consequence, commodity prices are expected to remain at elevated levels, following recent declines. These high prices, combined with persistent excess demand in major emerging-market economies, are contributing to broader global inflationary pressures. Widespread concerns over sovereign debt have increased risk aversion and volatility in financial markets.
 
In Canada, the economic expansion is proceeding largely as projected, although the expected rotation of demand is somewhat slower than had been anticipated. Household spending remains solid and business investment robust. Net exports remain weak, reflecting modest US demand and ongoing competitiveness challenges, particularly the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar. Despite increased global risk aversion, financial conditions in Canada remain very stimulative and private credit growth is strong.
 
Following an anticipated slowdown in growth during the second quarter due to temporary supply-chain disruptions and the impact of higher energy prices on consumption, the Bank expects growth in Canada to re-accelerate in the second half of 2011. Over the projection horizon, business investment is expected to remain strong, household spending to grow more in line with disposable income and net exports to become more supportive of growth. Relative to the April projection, growth in household spending is now projected to be slightly firmer, reflecting higher household income, and net exports to be slightly weaker, reflecting more subdued US activity. Overall, the Bank projects the economy will expand by 2.8 per cent in 2011, 2.6 per cent in 2012 and 2.1 per cent in 2013, returning to capacity in the middle of 2012.
 
Total CPI inflation is expected to remain above 3 per cent in the near term, largely reflecting temporary factors such as significantly higher food and energy prices. Core inflation is slightly firmer than anticipated, owing to temporary factors and to more persistent strength in the prices of some services. Core inflation is now expected to remain around 2 per cent over the projection horizon. Total CPI inflation is expected to return to the 2 per cent target by the middle of 2012 as temporary factors unwind, excess supply in the economy is gradually absorbed, labour compensation growth stays modest, productivity recovers and inflation expectations remain well anchored.
 
The Bank's projection assumes that authorities are able to contain the ongoing European sovereign debt crisis, although there are clear risks around this outcome.
 
More broadly, there are a number of risks to the outlook for inflation in Canada. The three main upside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the possibility of higher-than-projected commodity prices and global inflation, stronger momentum in Canadian household spending, and the possibility that there is less excess capacity in the Canadian economy.
 
The three main downside risks to inflation in Canada relate to sovereign debt concerns in Europe, headwinds from the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar and the possibility that growth in Canadian household spending could be weaker than projected.
 
Overall, the Bank judges that the risks to the inflation outlook in Canada are roughly balanced over the projection horizon.
 
Reflecting all of these factors, on 19 July, the Bank maintained the target for the overnight rate at 1 per cent. To the extent that the expansion continues and the current material excess supply in the economy is gradually absorbed, some of the considerable monetary policy stimulus currently in place will be withdrawn, consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target. Such reduction would need to be carefully considered.
 
The global economic expansion is proceeding broadly as expected at the time of the April Monetary Policy Report. Growth prospects in many advanced economies continue to be affected by the ongoing repair of household, bank and government balance sheets. Although high commodity prices and the disasters in Japan contributed to weaker growth in the first half of 2011, economic activity in these economies is expected to rebound through the second half of the year and continue to grow at a steady pace through 2012-13, although on a somewhat lower track. Unlike the situation in most advanced economies, growth in emerging-market economies has remained exceptionally strong. Excess demand in many of these economies, coupled with past increases in commodity prices, is creating broader global inflationary pressures.
 
Widespread concerns over sovereign debt have increased risk aversion and volatility in financial markets. Contagion from recent developments in Greece has been felt most acutely in euro-area financial markets, impacting banks, non-financial corporations and other euro-area sovereigns. Financial conditions for banks, non-financial corporations and sovereigns in other countries generally remain very supportive.
 
Developments during the first half of 2011 differed significantly across economic regions. Growth has slowed in the United States, but has been fairly solid in the euro area as a whole. In Japan, the disasters triggered on 11 March caused a marked contraction in economic activity as well as disruptions to global production networks. Growth in emerging-market economies, in contrast, continues to be robust. Increasing demand from these countries has been the principal driver of the rise in world commodity prices, unlike in earlier periods when demand from advanced economies accounted for most of the movements in these prices.
 
Real GDP growth in the United States decelerated to slightly below 2.0 per cent in the first half of 2011, owing to a pronounced slowing in household spending. Growth in US consumption continues to be constrained by the ongoing repair of household balance sheets. In addition, consumption spending has been restrained by a number of temporary factors, including the rapid rise in oil and food prices and supply-chain disruptions from Japan, which limited the available stock of Japanese motor vehicles in the United States. These temporary effects are expected to dissipate in coming months and growth is projected to pick up in the second half of the year, albeit at a somewhat slower pace than was anticipated at the time of the April Report. Historical revisions indicate that, consistent with sluggish labour market conditions, growth in US real personal disposable income since the fourth quarter of 2010 has been weaker than initially reported. The personal savings rate fell from a recent peak of 6.3 per cent in June 2010 to 5.0 per cent in May 2011, suggesting that household balance-sheet repair has not progressed as far as anticipated, especially in the context of falling housing prices and lower equity prices.
 
US residential investment fell further in the first half of the year as persistently high unemployment and the weak financial situation of households continued to dampen housing demand. The inventory of vacant homes also remained elevated, leading to additional downward pressure on house prices with further negative implications for household and bank balance sheets.
 
Non-residential construction remains weak, but conditions in this sector appear to be stabilizing. The most recent survey of bank lending conditions noted a slight easing in standards for commercial real estate loans for the first time since 2005 as well as an increase in the demand for loans.
 
Strong growth in exports and business investment in equipment and software continued to underpin US economic growth over the first half of the year. Business investment has been bolstered by healthy corporate balance sheets and the low cost of capital. US exports have benefited from robust external demand and improved international price competitiveness, brought about by solid productivity growth and a sizable depreciation in the US real effective exchange rate.
 
In the euro area, real GDP growth rebounded to 3.4 per cent in the first quarter, following weather-related disruptions at the end of 2010. Available indicators point to slower, but still solid, growth in the second quarter. Overall, economic activity in the first half of the year was stronger than anticipated in the April Report, mainly reflecting more robust growth in investment. Fundamentals remain strong in the core economies, most notably in Germany, where the unemployment rate is at a post-unification low. Some peripheral economies continue to face significant challenges, however. Greece, in particular, has had difficulty delivering the fiscal adjustments required as part of the financing programs that it received from the International Monetary Fund and the European Union. Weak macroeconomic performance in the periphery is leading to rising debt and deficits, exacerbating the underlying fiscal sustainability problems and intensifying financial stability concerns.
 
Real GDP growth in Japan contracted sharply in the first quarter. Damage caused by the earthquake and tsunami in March constrained the growth of exports and led to a significant decline in private domestic demand. Falling inventories also had a negative effect on growth, since the disruptions to production forced firms to run down their existing stocks to meet demand. Real GDP is estimated to have contracted again in the second quarter, with supply bottlenecks and weakness in private domestic demand continuing to weigh on growth. Although the drop in Japan's economic activity was much more severe than anticipated in the April Report, recent indicators suggest that it has bottomed out.
 
Economic growth in China eased slightly from 9.8 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2010 to 9.5 per cent in the second quarter of 2011, owing in part to the monetary tightening undertaken in the past year. Despite the modest deceleration in economic growth, excessive credit expansion, sharp increases in property prices and rapid growth in real estate investment have raised doubts about the sustainability of the current growth path. High local government debt levels, combined with significant government and bank exposures to the property sector, are adding to concerns about financial stability. Excess demand conditions still prevail and inflationary pressures are rising. Consumer price inflation currently stands at 6.4 per cent - its highest level in three years. In the past three months, in an effort to mitigate inflationary pressures, authorities in China have raised the reserve requirement ratio for financial institutions by 150 basis points, bringing it to a historical high of 21.5 per cent for large institutions. Authorities have also raised official interest rates by 25 basis points, to 3.5 per cent in the case of the one-year deposit rate, which remains negative in real terms. Efforts to contain inflationary pressures appear to have been inhibited by the lack of flexibility in the country's exchange rate.
 
Despite recent declines, global commodity prices remain high by historical standards, supported by robust demand from emerging-market economies and tight global supply conditions. Prices for oil and metals have fallen sharply since the last Report, reflecting market expectations for weaker economic growth, some unwinding of financial positions and, in the case of oil, the release of strategic petroleum reserves by the International Energy Agency. North American natural gas prices, in contrast, are little changed from their levels at the time of the April Report, while agricultural prices have experienced a modest correction in response to an improved outlook for grain harvests.
 
Past increases in food and energy prices continue to exert upward pressure on inflation in both advanced and emerging-market economies. These pressures are being exacerbated in many emerging-market economies by excess demand and rapid growth in wages and credit. Monetary authorities in the emerging-market economies have taken measures to contain these inflation pressures, but monetary conditions nevertheless remain exceptionally stimulative, suggesting that inflation pressures are likely to persist. Major advanced countries have also had to contend with rising commodity prices, but underlying inflation pressures continue to be modest, reflecting the smaller pass-through from commodity prices into core inflation and significant excess capacity. Policy interest rates in these economies have therefore remained low.
 
Conditions in global financial markets remain supportive. Several developments have weighed on investor sentiment in recent weeks, however, leading to heightened risk aversion and increased volatility.
 
Equity prices in advanced and emerging-market economies have declined over the past three months in reaction to greater uncertainty about the strength of the global recovery. Conditions in corporate credit markets have also deteriorated somewhat. Although corporate bond yields remain close to their historical lows, corporate credit spreads have widened, especially for high-yield issuers. Corporate bond issuance has also fallen sharply, albeit from very elevated levels. Capital has shifted into perceived safe-haven assets and currencies, putting downward pressure on government bond yields in major advanced economies.
 
Market concerns about acute fiscal strains in some euro-area peripheral countries, especially Greece, Portugal and Ireland, have increased noticeably, as demonstrated by the sharp widening in their sovereign spreads to new record levels. In contrast to the period surrounding the April Report, when sovereign debt concerns were mostly confined to the weakest peripheral countries, there have been signs of contagion spreading to other European sovereigns: Spanish and Italian 10-year bond spreads have reached their highest levels since the introduction of the euro.
 
Contagion has also extended to the European banking sector, with bank stocks falling significantly. Commercial banks in Greece, Ireland and Portugal have experienced serious funding problems and have relied heavily on central bank liquidity. Other European banks have faced some deterioration in wholesale funding conditions, reflecting their direct and indirect exposures to vulnerable sovereigns.
 
Investor confidence in the fiscal positions of a number of advanced economies has also weakened. Lengthy negotiations in the United States on the debt ceiling and the inability of US policy-makers to agree on a longer-term solution to that country's debt problem have weighed on market sentiment, which was already fragile.
 
Growth in the global economy is projected to average about 4.0 per cent annually through 2013. Compared with the April Report, growth has been marked down in 2011, owing mostly to a weaker near-term outlook for the United States and Japan, but it is broadly similar thereafter. As projected in past reports, deleveraging by households and sovereigns is expected to restrain growth in many advanced economies. The Bank's base-case projection assumes that authorities are able to contain the ongoing European sovereign debt crisis, but includes a slightly lower profile for GDP growth in Europe. A rebalancing of growth within emerging-market countries, with greater reliance on consumption spending, is expected to help support export growth in the advanced economies and set the global recovery on a more sustainable path.
 
Real GDP growth in the United States is projected to strengthen in the second half of 2011, averaging about 3 1/4 per cent. The pickup in growth is driven largely by stronger consumption spending, assisted by the recent decline in oil prices, as well as a rebound in manufacturing production as imports of motor vehicle parts from Japan gradually return to normal.
 
US real GDP is also expected to rise by about 3ј per cent on an average annual basis over the 2012-13 period. This growth profile is broadly in line with expectations at the time of the last Report, but nevertheless implies a lower GDP track than previously anticipated. The rise in GDP is modest by post-recession standards, reflecting the restraining effects of ongoing balance-sheet repair by households as well as an expected tightening in fiscal policy. Significant fiscal consolidation is incorporated into the Bank's base-case projection. This exerts a drag on US GDP growth of roughly 1 percentage point in 2012 and 1.7 percentage points in 2013.
 
US consumption is projected to grow at a steady pace of approximately 2 per cent through 2013, supported by a gradual recovery in the labour market that more than offsets the dampening effects of ongoing household balance-sheet repair and the drag on personal disposable income coming from fiscal consolidation. The recovery in new residential construction is expected to be further delayed and then to proceed gradually over the projection horizon, given the elevated supply of vacant homes. A modest recovery in the construction of non-residential structures is also expected over this period.
 
Exports and business investment in equipment and software are expected to remain the key drivers of the US economic expansion. Supported by the low cost of capital and firming economic conditions, business investment should continue to grow at a robust pace through 2013. Growth in net exports is expected to benefit from further improvements in US cost competitiveness and an anticipated rebalancing of GDP growth in the emerging-market economies toward increased domestic demand and higher imports.
 
Euro-area GDP is expected to expand at a moderate pace through 2013, although at a somewhat weaker rate than projected in the April Report. Fiscal and financial strains associated with the debt crisis are expected to weigh more heavily on the region's growth prospects over the next three years. As a result, the two-speed pace of the recovery in Europe is projected to continue, with solid momentum in most of the core economies and persistent challenges in the periphery.
 
A reconstruction led recovery is projected for Japan over the forecast horizon. Improving labour market conditions should also support the growth of private domestic demand over this period.
 
In China, real GDP growth is expected to remain strong, but should moderate through 2012-13 in response to monetary tightening and a further real appreciation of the Chinese currency. These developments, as well as structural reforms, should facilitate a rebalancing of growth away from capital investment and exports and toward consumption. This rotation of demand should help diffuse pressures in the real estate market and dampen inflationary pressures, thereby reducing the probability of a sharper downturn in the future.
 
Economic growth in other emerging-market economies is expected to remain robust, reflecting persistent strength in domestic demand and buoyant regional and global trade. Growth is projected to decelerate gradually over the projection period, however, as tighter monetary and fiscal policies reduce excess demand and inflationary pressures. A modest further appreciation of their real exchange rates should also help to restrain export growth.
 
Although commodity prices are expected to be lower than in the April Report, they are projected to remain at historically elevated levels, supported by solid demand from emerging-market economies and limited increases in supply. Based on the latest futures curve, oil prices should remain relatively stable, increasing slightly from current levels and reaching $104 per barrel by the end of 2013. Natural gas prices are also expected to rise, based on the latest futures curve, but increased shale production should keep them low relative to their historical relationship with oil prices. Non-energy commodity prices are projected to stay close to their current levels over the next three years, with a steady increase in metals production and a normalization of crop yields offsetting the effects of growing global demand.
 
In Canada, the economic expansion has been proceeding largely as expected in the April Report. While the supply-chain disruptions resulting from the recent disasters in Japan are leading to volatility in the near-term profile of activity, the broader outlook is little changed, with the Bank continuing to project a moderate pace of growth ahead. The rebalancing of aggregate demand in Canada is gradually unfolding, albeit at a somewhat slower pace than anticipated. Business investment is growing strongly and contributions to growth from government expenditures are diminishing. The Bank continues to project a moderation in the growth of household expenditures, although this is expected to proceed more gradually than in the April projection, reflecting higher personal disposable income. At the same time, net exports have become less of a drag on growth, but further improvement will be restrained by the downwardly revised profile for US growth and ongoing competitiveness challenges.
 
Core inflation has been slightly firmer than projected in the April Report and is now expected to remain around 2 per cent over the projection horizon. Total CPI inflation is expected to remain above 3 per cent in the near term, largely reflecting temporary factors. It is expected to return to the 2 per cent target by the middle of 2012 as temporary factors unwind, excess supply in the economy is gradually absorbed, labour compensation growth stays modest, productivity recovers and inflation expectations remain well anchored.
 
Real GDP in Canada grew at an annual rate of 3.9 per cent in the first quarter of 2011, broadly as expected in the April Report. In the second quarter, growth has slowed sharply, as expected, largely as a result of temporary factors.
 
Growth in overall household expenditures continued to moderate in the first quarter, despite solid growth in personal disposable income and favourable financial conditions. Growth in consumer spending was very weak, restrained in part by the adjustment to higher prices for food and energy, while residential investment rebounded strongly, reflecting some pulling forward of activity in advance of changes in mortgage insurance regulations. At 4.2 per cent, the personal savings rate in the first quarter was somewhat higher than had been anticipated at the time of the April Report, reflecting both the weakness in consumption and upward revisions to the level of personal disposable income through 2010. Growth in government expenditures also moderated in the first quarter.
 
Business fixed investment continued to grow at a rapid pace, reflecting higher spending on both machinery and equipment and non-residential structures. Despite its strong rebound since the end of 2009, business fixed investment had recovered only two-thirds of its unusually sharp recessionary decline by the end of the first quarter.
 
Net exports exerted some drag on overall GDP growth in the first quarter, as anticipated in the April Report, in part reflecting Canada's ongoing competitiveness challenges. Growth in exports moderated from the rapid pace of late 2010 as exports of non-energy commodities and machinery and equipment eased, although strong increases in exports of autos and energy (related in part to the opening of a new pipeline) supported solid overall growth. Growth in imports reflected a resumption of inventory accumulation, as well as ongoing strength in business investment in machinery and equipment.
 
The Bank estimates that economic growth slowed sharply to 1.5 per cent in the second quarter, a slightly greater deceleration than expected in the April Report. The slowdown in the second quarter is largely attributable to the expected moderation in government spending as well as to temporary factors, notably the effects of higher food and energy prices on consumer spending in Canada and the United States and supply-chain disruptions related to the Japanese disasters in March. The Bank now estimates that these supply disruptions will subtract roughly three-quarters of a percentage point from GDP growth in Canada in the second quarter, a slightly larger impact than projected in the April Report. The boost to activity in the second half of 2011 as conditions normalize is, correspondingly, expected to be slightly greater than previously anticipated.
 
Indicators of capacity pressures in Canada have been mixed. The level of real GDP has been marginally lower in the first half of 2011 than the Bank had projected, suggesting a greater degree of slack than previously anticipated. However, some indicators of capacity pressures suggest that the economy may be operating closer to its production potential. The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap for the second quarter of 2011 stood at -0.7 per cent. In addition, the Bank's summer Business Outlook Survey finds that the proportion of firms indicating that they would have difficulty responding to an unexpected increase in demand has risen above its historical average. Nonetheless, the proportion of firms reporting significant capacity constraints remains low. Moreover, key labour market indicators, such as the unemployment rate, average hours worked and the proportion of involuntary part-time workers, as well as the below-average proportion of firms facing labour shortages as reported in the Bank's survey, point to significant excess capacity.
 
On balance, the Bank judges that the economy was operating at slightly less than 1 per cent below its production capacity in the second quarter of 2011, roughly the same degree of slack as the Bank had anticipated in April.
 
Core CPI inflation rose to an average of 1.7 per cent in April and May, from 1.3 per cent in the first quarter, partly because of the passing of a number of transitory factors that had been dampening it.  In addition, the gradual pass-through of the surge in world agricultural commodity prices has resulted in a significant rise in core food prices. While these increases have been consistent with expectations at the time of the April Report, price developments for many services have been slightly firmer than expected, although wage growth has remained modest. The prices of semi-durable goods have also been slightly firmer than expected. The gap between prices in Canada and the United States for a number of durable and semi-durable goods, adjusted for the exchange rate, remains wide.
 
The increase in total CPI inflation from 2.6 per cent in the first quarter to an average of 3.5 per cent in April and May has been larger than anticipated in the April Report, owing to a greater-than-expected rise in Canadian gasoline prices, as well as firmer-than-expected core inflation.
 
Measures of short-term inflation expectations remain consistent with earlier sharp increases in world commodity prices and their observed effects on total CPI. The July Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation was 3.0 per cent in 2011 and very close to the target in 2012 (2.1 per cent).
 
Expectations for average inflation over the next two years, as reported in the Bank's summer Business Outlook Survey, remain concentrated within the 1 to 3 per cent control range, with a majority of firms continuing to expect inflation to be in the upper half of the range, consistent with the recent rapid increase in commodity prices and in the total CPI. Market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations remain consistent with the 2 per cent inflation-control target. Overall, the Bank judges that inflation expectations are well anchored at the 2 per cent target.
 
Despite rising global risk aversion, financial conditions in Canada have remained very stimulative in recent months, providing important support to the economic expansion. Effective borrowing costs for households and businesses have edged down further, and remain very low by historical standards. As well, there has been an additional easing in access to financing for Canadian firms.
 
Following a gradual slowing through much of 2010, the growth of household credit picked up markedly in the first quarter of 2011. This reacceleration appeared to largely reflect transitory factors that boosted the demand for mortgage credit, notably the lagged effects of the surge in sales of existing homes in the fourth quarter of last year, as well as some pulling forward of activity related to recent changes to mortgage insurance regulations. With the passing of these temporary factors, the pace of expansion of household credit has recently moderated somewhat.
 
The Bank's Senior Loan Officer Survey for the second quarter of 2011 indicated a further easing in the lending conditions faced by a wide range of firms, reflecting heightened competition among lending institutions and from capital markets, as well as a more favourable domestic economic outlook. Results from the summer Business Outlook Survey also point to a further easing in credit conditions for firms of all sizes.
 
Investor demand for risky assets in Canada has generally remained strong, partly reflecting the low level of government bond yields. Accordingly, credit spreads have stayed narrow and corporate bond issuance in Canada has been relatively strong, although issuance has declined in recent weeks amid increased global risk aversion. The Canadian S&P/TSX Composite Index has retreated from its peak earlier in 2011, along with other major world stock markets. In response to favourable financing conditions and the robust ongoing recovery in business investment, growth in total business credit has remained fairly strong in recent months.
 
Compared with the unusually rapid pace registered between the end of 2008 and early 2010, growth in the narrow monetary aggregates has been moderate in recent months, consistent with reduced liquidity preference among households and firms. Growth in the broader M2++ aggregate has been edging up but remains below its historical average, continuing to suggest subdued inflation pressures ahead.
 
The Canadian dollar has averaged 103 cents US since the May fixed announcement date, in line with the level assumed in the April Report. It has been volatile since the end of June, reflecting broader financial market developments. The Canadian-dollar effective exchange rate index has moved in a similar fashion.
 
The Bank's base-case projection incorporates the following key assumptions: a Canada/US exchange rate averaging 103 cents US; energy prices in line with recent futures prices; persistently strong prices for non-energy commodities; and supportive global credit conditions.
 
The Bank's outlook for the Canadian economy is little changed from the April Report, with a generally moderate pace of expansion expected. Following a rebound in the second half of 2011 related to the unwinding of supply disruptions, economic growth in Canada is expected to slow toward the economy's potential rate of growth over the projection horizon. The Bank continues to expect that the rotation of aggregate demand in Canada away from household and government expenditures toward business fixed investment and net exports will persist over the projection horizon. Relative to the April Report, growth in household spending is expected to be slightly firmer, while downward revisions to projected US demand and ongoing competitiveness challenges are expected to slow the improvement in Canada's net exports.
 
On an average annual basis, real GDP is projected to grow by 2.8 per cent in 2011 and 2.6 per cent in 2012, while growth in 2013 is expected to moderate to 2.1 per cent, with the economy operating at full capacity. This growth profile implies a similar level of activity to that projected in the April Report, with the Bank continuing to expect the economy to return to full capacity in the middle of 2012.
 
As in April, the Bank expects growth in household expenditures to moderate over the projection horizon relative to the rapid pace throughout the recovery, in line with some moderation in the growth of personal disposable income. The high level of consumer indebtedness is also anticipated to restrain the growth of household spending, with the savings rate expected to decline only modestly and the upward trajectory in the ratio of household debt to income projected to moderate. The level of personal disposable income in the Bank's base-case projection is higher than in the April Report, largely reflecting historical revisions. On balance, the projection for household spending is slightly higher than in the April Report, although the Bank continues to expect household expenditures as a share of the economy to decline gradually toward its historical average.
 
The Bank continues to project that the contribution of government spending to real GDP growth will be negative through the balance of 2011 and into 2012, consistent with the previously announced unwinding of fiscal stimulus. The profile for government expenditures has been adjusted from the April projection, incorporating the latest information from all levels of government as well as reflecting historical revisions to the national accounts.
 
Business fixed investment is expected to continue to rise rapidly over the projection horizon, with considerable scope remaining to offset the unusually sharp decline experienced during the recession. The buoyant outlook for investment reflects the solid financial positions of Canadian firms, favourable credit conditions, high commodity prices and the strong Canadian dollar, as well as the impetus to improve productivity amid heightened pressures to become more competitive. The Bank's Business Outlook Survey has also indicated a consistently high level of investment intentions in recent quarters.
 
The Bank continues to expect an improvement in net exports over the projection horizon as exports recover with rising external demand and import growth slows along with the moderation in the growth of domestic demand. However, the recovery in exports is likely to be modest, given Canada's ongoing competitiveness challenges, which stem primarily from the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar. The expected recovery in Canadian exports over the medium term is now projected to be even more muted than in the April Report, reflecting negative revisions to the projected pace of US demand growth, although the growth in exports in the second half of 2011 is likely to be temporarily boosted by the unwinding of supply-chain disruptions. The Bank continues to expect that the expansion in imports will be underpinned by solid growth in business investment, because of its typically high import content and, more generally, by greater import penetration due to the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar. Net exports will continue to be sensitive to currency movements and the expected recovery in productivity growth, as well as to the prospects for external demand.
 
The Bank expects core inflation to remain around 2 per cent over the projection horizon as excess supply in the economy is slowly absorbed and inflation expectations remain well anchored. Transitory factors are expected to push core inflation slightly above 2 per cent on a temporary basis. As in the April Report, the Bank expects that the dampening effects of HST-related tax refunds passed on by businesses a year ago will fade in coming quarters.  The lagged effects of higher prices for agricultural commodities on food prices in Canada are also expected to put further upward pressure on core inflation through the second half of 2011, with this impact unwinding through 2012, thus contributing to the stabilization of core inflation at 2 per cent. Slightly firmer prices for core services are expected to have a more persistent effect on core inflation. The high level of the Canadian dollar is expected to continue to help dampen inflationary pressures.
 
In coming quarters, total CPI inflation is projected to fall from its recently elevated level, partly because of the unwinding of the impact of the introduction of the HST in July 2010 on the year-over-year rate of inflation. In addition, energy prices have fallen from their peak, and are projected to be relatively stable going forward, rising only modestly. As a result, total CPI inflation is still expected to converge to core inflation at the 2 per cent target by the middle of 2012.
 
This projection includes a gradual reduction in monetary stimulus over the projection horizon, consistent with achieving the inflation target.
 
The uncertainty surrounding the Bank's inflation projection is illustrated using fan charts. Chart 29 and Chart 30 depict the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the third quarter of 2011 to the end of 2013.
 
Although the global outlook remains broadly unchanged, global risks have intensified, most notably in Europe.
 
The three main upside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the possibility of higher-than-projected commodity prices and global inflation, stronger momentum in Canadian household spending, and the possibility that there is less excess capacity in the Canadian economy.
 
If efforts to restrain excess demand and mounting inflation pressures in emerging-market economies prove unsuccessful, commodity prices and global inflation could rise much faster than projected, raising incomes in Canada through higher export prices and increasing pressures on domestic prices.
 
There could be stronger-than-expected momentum in household expenditures in Canada. With very stimulative financing conditions, borrowing could grow faster than income.
 
The economy's production potential could be lower than estimated. While labour market indicators still point to significant slack, some indicators of capacity pressures suggest that the economy may be operating closer to its production potential.
 
The three main downside risks to inflation in Canada relate to sovereign debt concerns in Europe, headwinds from the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar and the possibility that growth in household spending could be weaker than projected.
 
Acute fiscal and financial strains in Europe could trigger a generalized retrenchment from risk-taking and severe dislocations in global funding markets.
 
The persistent strength of the Canadian dollar could create even greater headwinds for the Canadian economy, putting additional downward pressure on inflation through weaker-than-expected net exports and larger declines in import prices.
 
High household debt levels in Canada could lead to a sharper-than-expected deceleration in household spending. Relatedly, if there were a sudden weakening in the Canadian housing sector, it could have sizable spillover effects on other areas of the economy.
 
Overall, the Bank judges that the risks to the inflation outlook in Canada are roughly balanced over the projection horizon.