The outlook for global economic growth remains solid. In the United States, consumer spending and business investment are expected to stay strong. While protectionism remains a threat globally, the proposed new trade agreement between Canada, the United States and Mexico will reduce some of the trade policy uncertainty within North America. In other regions, growth is healthy, although risks have risen in some emerging-market economies and China. The Bank expects that the global economy will grow by about 3 3/4 per cent in 2018, before moderating to around 3 1/2 per cent in 2019.
 
The global economic outlook would be even stronger without US-China trade tensions and the related uncertainty. Trade tensions are weighing on some commodity prices and have likely contributed to slower global trade and investment growth. The Bank's projection includes the adverse effects of uncertainty on investment and the impact of recent and previously implemented tariffs by the United States and other countries. The total drag is currently estimated to reduce the level of global gross domestic product by 0.3 per cent by the end of 2020.
 
However, the fallout from trade tensions is difficult to predict and could be more severe than what is included in the projection. The effects of trade actions can build on each other in unexpected ways, and new measures could have a disproportionately large impact.
 
The US economy has expanded at a rapid pace in recent months, with fiscal stimulus contributing to growth that is stronger than potential. Consumption and business investment have been robust, supported by a tight labour market. Wage growth has been moderate but is steadily rising. Exports surged in the second quarter, likely benefiting from a temporary boost ahead of tariffs imposed by China. Meanwhile, supply constraints and declining affordability continue to hold back residential investment growth.
 
The outlook includes more drag on business investment than in the July Monetary Policy Report due to new US-China tariffs. US businesses are reporting that trade policy uncertainty is dampening investment, although these effects are not yet evident in the data. Tariffs put in place over the past year are leading to higher prices on some products.
 
The US economy is forecast to grow by around 3 per cent in 2018 and 2 1/2 per cent in 2019, above its potential growth rate. Consumption is anticipated to rise at a healthy pace, underpinned by strong job gains and income tax cuts. The profile for consumption is consistent with a roughly flat projection for the savings rate of around 7 per cent. Solid private demand is expected to drive robust investment growth, helped by corporate tax cuts.
 
Growth is forecast to moderate to around 1 1/2 per cent in 2020, a pace that is closer to potential. This cooling is expected to help keep core inflation from going much above 2 per cent. The Federal Open Market Committee's median projection is consistent with a gradual rise in the Federal Reserve's policy rate. A gradual path reduces the likelihood of a more sudden repricing of financial risk and tightening financial conditions.
 
Growth in the euro area was weaker than expected over the first half of 2018. Exports were one source of drag on growth, partly because of temporary factors, including a past appreciation of the euro. Domestic demand, meanwhile, is healthy, and the labour market continues to improve. Euro area growth should ease from around 2 per cent in 2018 to about 1 1/2 per cent in 2020 as monetary policy becomes less accommodative and capacity becomes constrained. Core inflation is still tepid and is anticipated to rise only gradually.
 
Political developments remain a source of downside risk. The Bank's base case continues to assume an orderly Brexit, with some modest negative effects from uncertainty. There is risk to this assumption, given that no deal is in place yet. In Italy, a planned increase in fiscal spending has driven a rise in the spread between Italian and benchmark bond yields.
 
While financial conditions remain accommodative in most countries, they should become less so as advanced economies gradually remove monetary policy stimulus. The Federal Reserve recently raised its policy rate and, in October, the European Central Bank reduced its asset purchases (quantitative easing). Globally, bond yields have mostly risen since July, largely in parallel across the short and long ends of the yield curve. Earlier this year, some analysts expressed concern about whether a flattening of the yield curve signals a downturn in the US economy. However, a broader set of market-based measures suggests continued, though somewhat slower, growth in the near term.
 
As advanced economies withdraw monetary policy stimulus, there could be more rebalancing across asset classes. In this context, volatility has increased in a number of asset classes since July. EMEs are particularly vulnerable to tighter global liquidity, given a rise in debt levels denominated in US dollars in recent years. A further appreciation of the US dollar since July has added to these pressures. Financial market stress has been acute in EMEs with elevated levels of foreign currency debt and that have weak monetary policy frameworks. There has been some further financial tightening in other EMEs since July, but few signs of large-scale capital outflows. A further escalation of trade tensions, wage and inflation surprises, or a sharp rise in oil prices could lead to an even faster tightening of global financial conditions than that included in the Bank's projection.
 
While financial stress has intensified in Argentina and Turkey, growth in most EMEs was generally better than expected over the first half of 2018. On net, growth in oil-importing EMEs is now forecast to be weaker than projected in July, softening to around 4 per cent in 2019 before recovering to around 4 1/2 per cent in 2020. It is assumed in the forecast that financial contagion remains limited, although it is still a risk. Growth in oil-exporting countries is projected to rise, given higher oil prices and less drag from fiscal consolidation.
 
Policy support is expected to keep China's growth in line with official targets, although downside risks have increased. Past steps to reduce financial vulnerabilities have slowed credit growth, but are likely dampening economic growth. Rising trade tensions with the United States are also expected to weigh on exports and investment. Early possible signs of these effects include a softening in surveys of new export orders. In this context, authorities have announced new fiscal and credit stimulus that should counter some of the expected drag. A weaker renminbi should also offset some of the effects of tariffs on export growth. Growth is forecast to ease from around 6 1/2 per cent in 2018 to around 6 per cent in 2020, somewhat softer than in the July projection and just below the rate of potential output growth.
 
The recent average for the price of Brent oil, the global benchmark, is US$5 per barrel higher than assumed in the July Report. The increase primarily reflects supply declines in Iran and Venezuela. Meanwhile, the spread between West Texas Intermediate and Western Canada Select has widened. Demand for WCS from US refineries has dropped, since maintenance shutdowns began earlier in the year and have been more widespread than usual. The effect on the price differential is being amplified by a faster expansion of oil sands production than of transportation capacity. The WTI-WCS spread will likely narrow in the near term as some temporary headwinds are resolved. The spread will likely remain volatile, however, given that it will take time to address transportation constraints.
 
Risks to global oil prices are balanced around current levels. There could be greater-than-expected compliance with US sanctions on Iranian oil exports, and Venezuelan output could drop even lower. The Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries may also be less able to fully offset production declines than in the past. However, concerns about the impacts of trade disputes on the global outlook could weigh more heavily on prices.
 
The Bank's non-energy commodity price index is around 10 per cent lower than in July. Worries over growth in China are pulling down prices for base metals. Tariffs levied by China and Mexico against the United States have also put downward pressure on some agricultural prices since July. In addition, lumber prices have fallen, reflecting lower-than-expected US housing demand. Overall, the drop in WCS and non-energy commodity prices is weighing on Canada's terms of trade.
 
Economic growth in Canada is tracking close to potential, and its composition is now more balanced than last year. Inflation is expected to remain within the target range and move toward 2 per cent over the projection horizon. The Canadian economy will be supported by solid growth in both foreign and domestic demand and continuing favourable financial conditions. Firms are expected to invest to alleviate capacity pressures and improve productivity. The completion of negotiations toward a new United States-Mexico Canada Agreement is encouraging, because it has reduced trade policy uncertainty and the associated drag on business investment and exports. However, the recent declines in commodity prices and the terms of trade are forecast to have a modest negative effect on investment. Exports are anticipated to expand at a moderate pace, restrained by ongoing competitiveness challenges and limited transportation capacity. Meanwhile, households continue to adjust to higher interest rates and changes to mortgage underwriting guidelines. Consumption is expected to grow at a healthy pace, supported by rising wages. The boost to income from a larger population is more than offset by the negative consequences of weaker terms of trade.
 
Consumer price index inflation has risen in recent months by more than was anticipated in the July Report. Inflation reached 2.7 per cent in the third quarter of 2018, but is expected to fall back to near 2 per cent by the end of the first quarter of 2019 as the effects of temporary factors, notably related to airfares, gasoline prices and minimum wages, dissipate. The Bank's measures of core inflation remain near 2 per cent, consistent with an economy that is operating close to capacity.
 
As expected in the July Report, GDP growth increased to a strong pace of 2.9 per cent in the second quarter of 2018, mainly due to a surge in exports. The economy has solid momentum, so that even with slower export growth, real GDP is forecast to expand about 2 per cent on average in the second half of 2018.
 
The composition of demand has been shifting toward business investment and exports and away from consumption and housing, driven in part by households adjusting their spending in response to higher interest rates and changes to housing market policies. In particular, higher mortgage rates, new mortgage finance guidelines, and provincial and municipal housing market policies are contributing to the softness in housing activity this year. After sharp declines earlier in 2018, national resales have started recovering. In the Greater Toronto Area, resales have begun to move higher, while those in the Greater Vancouver Area have stabilized. The pace of housing starts is expected to pick up in the fourth quarter after three quarters of contraction, supported by strengthening demographic demand. However, new construction is expected to ease modestly in the fourth quarter, reflecting the previous declines in starts and the ongoing shift toward lower-value units.
 
Consumption growth was solid in the second quarter and is expected to remain so in the near term, supported by steady income growth and elevated consumer confidence.
 
Firms are continuing to expand capacity in response to strong domestic and foreign demand, except in the oil and gas sector, where transportation constraints are an ongoing challenge. Export growth has improved since 2017, although volatility in the volume of exports has caused fluctuations in quarterly GDP growth. Exports were soft in the first two months of the third quarter, following the surge in the previous quarter. According to recent trade data, US tariffs and Canadian countermeasures have reduced steel exports and imports, but have not yet visibly affected aluminum shipments. In this context, the trade data provide only a partial view of the much broader negative impacts of the tariffs and countermeasures on many firms. Negotiations to remove these tariffs are under way.
 
The economy has been operating near capacity for more than a year. Real GDP is estimated to have grown at about potential in the third quarter, leaving the output gap the same as was reported for the second quarter in the July Report, between -0.5 and +0.5 per cent. Firms participating in the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey reported that capacity pressures continue to be elevated and labour shortages have intensified. The demand for labour is strong. Employment grew by 2.0 per cent over the 12 months through July, and the unemployment rate in September, at 5.9 per cent, was near its 40-year low. Wage gains have, however, remained moderate. Wages, as quantified by the wage-common, were rising at 2.3 per cent in the second quarter and have been increasing at about that rate since the beginning of 2017. Wage gains as reported in Statistics Canada's Labour Force Survey have eased over the past few months from elevated rates and are now closer to other measures of wage increases.
 
CPI inflation increased from 2.2 per cent in May to 3.0 per cent in July, before falling back to 2.2 per cent in September. Readings above 2 per cent have been primarily due to temporary factors, including an increase in gasoline prices in the first quarter and a surge in airfares in July. As a result of the unexpected increase in airfares in July and subsequent reversal in September, inflation in the third quarter rose by more than anticipated in the July Report.
 
All three core inflation measures have remained close to 2 per cent, reinforcing the Bank's view that the recent elevated levels of CPI inflation were caused by temporary factors. These figures are consistent with an economy operating close to full capacity.
 
The Bank projects that real GDP will continue to grow in line with potential output over the projection horizon and that the shifting composition of growth will stabilize and remain broadly based across goods- and services producing industries. Several sectors should contribute notably to the further expansion of the economy: non-residential construction outside the oil and gas sector, non-durable goods manufacturing, wholesale trade, and professional and transportation services.
 
The projections for investment and exports have been revised up. Some of the negative judgment on export and investment projections related to trade policy uncertainty has been removed. The recently negotiated USMCA reduces the uncertainty, although some remains because of the escalating trade tensions between China and the United States. The export outlook is modestly stronger, as the positive effects of reduced uncertainty are partly offset by the impact of lower commodity prices.
 
The growth profile of government spending in the projection is the same as in the July Report. By convention, only announced federal and provincial budgets are incorporated into the projection for government spending.
 
The outlook for consumption and housing is underpinned by income growth as households adjust to revised mortgage guidelines and higher interest rates. In line with the expectations of firms participating in the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey, wage growth is forecast to rise, driven by tightening labour markets and an expected improvement in productivity growth. In addition, labour income is being boosted by the larger population. Net international migration has surged in recent quarters, mainly driven by work permit holders. Compared with expectations in the July Report, the larger population than previously assumed has a positive effect. This is more than offset by the weaker projection for real gross domestic income associated with the deterioration in the terms of trade.
 
Consumption is projected to grow at a healthy pace, although the pace of spending gradually slows in response to rising interest rates. So far, consumption has largely evolved in line with the predictions of the Bank's models since the first increase of the policy rate in mid-2017.
 
After growing steadily for several years, residential investment is projected to be roughly unchanged over the projection horizon. Higher mortgage rates and the changes to mortgage guidelines are affecting the dynamics of housing activity. Housing resales responded quickly to the new mortgage guidelines, and the level of resale activity is expected to continue on a lower trajectory than before the changes. New home construction is shifting toward smaller units, although stronger population growth is estimated to raise fundamental demand for housing.
 
Household credit growth has slowed, and the share of new mortgages with high loan-to-income ratios has fallen. The ratio of household debt to income has levelled off and is anticipated to edge down. While household sector vulnerabilities are expected to ease, they will remain elevated over the projection horizon.
 
Firms outside the oil and gas sector are expected to continue to increase capacity in the face of solid domestic and foreign demand. Corporate profits are near historical highs, and business sentiment remains elevated. Firms participating in the autumn Business Outlook Survey reported strong investment intentions, driven by anticipated healthy demand, capacity pressures and the need to improve efficiency to keep up with competitors. While the overall outlook for investment is favourable, competitiveness challenges related to US tax reform and regulatory changes, as well as uncertainty around pipeline approval, are still expected to lead some exporters to delay their investments or to invest outside Canada.
 
Machinery and equipment manufacturers are making capacity investments to meet rising demand. As well, large-scale investment projects, such as the LNG Canada project, are currently under way or expected to begin over the projection horizon. Fast-growing firms in the computer systems design sector benefit from broad trends in the adoption of digital technology, both domestically and abroad. Canada has been successful in attracting foreign investment in knowledge-intensive fields, including research and development, software design and information technology services, communications, and professional and business support services.
 
In the oil and gas sector, investment is expected to be roughly flat over 2019-20. The outlook is slightly weaker than in the July Report. The revision reflects downgraded sentiment in the industry associated with the widening of the spread between WTI and WCS and the setback in the Trans Mountain Pipeline expansion project.
 
Exports are expected to be underpinned by solid foreign demand and increased export capacity, especially as the adverse effects of uncertainty on business sentiment have declined with the recently negotiated USMCA. Exports will also benefit from other trade agreements, including the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement and the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership , which are reducing barriers to Canadian exports for a wider set of countries.
 
Export growth is forecast to continue at a moderate pace, despite several limiting factors. Transportation capacity is expected to remain a source of restraint on energy exports, while global trade policy uncertainty and elevated competition from other countries—especially in the US market—also remain sources of drag. The Bank assesses that loss of investment competitiveness due to US tax reforms and uncertainty associated with global trade policies will together lower the level of exports by about 0.6 per cent between the third quarter of 2018 and the fourth quarter of 2020.  
 
Exports of both commodities and non-commodities are expected to expand over the projection horizon. Commodity exports are likely to be held back by the effects of the recent US tariffs on steel and aluminum and the lower level of non-energy commodity prices. Overall, commodity exports should grow at a moderate pace, led by solid energy exports as production at oil sands projects continues to expand.
 
Growth of non-commodity exports is anticipated to be relatively broad based. Machinery and equipment manufacturers face strong demand from rising US business investment, while aerospace exports are also expected to contribute positively to export growth in the short term. Strong growth of services-related exports should continue, due to healthy foreign demand for professional services and information and support services amid increasing US business investment and ongoing digitalization. In contrast, auto sector exports are expected to decline somewhat, partly reflecting the production mandates of Canadian auto assemblers.
 
Import growth is expected to slow from 3.4 per cent in 2018 to 1.8 per cent on average over 2019 and 2020. This trajectory is in line with the anticipated evolution of import demand from different GDP components, notably investment.
 
CPI inflation is projected to decline from 2.7 per cent in the third quarter of 2018 to close to 2 per cent in early 2019 as the effects of temporary factors dissipate. The effects of past increases in gasoline prices and minimum wages are anticipated to fade in the first quarter of 2019, while those of tariff countermeasures are expected to wane by the end of 2019. Inflation is subsequently expected to remain close to 2 per cent, consistent with an economy operating close to potential output.
 
The base-case projection provides the Bank's view of the most likely outcome for inflation, although any projection is subject to considerable forecast uncertainty. A 90 per cent confidence band around the inflation projection widens from ±0.6 percentage points in the fourth quarter of 2018 to ±1.5 percentage points by the end of 2020.
 
The projection is consistent with medium- and long-term inflation expectations remaining well anchored. Most respondents to the autumn Business Outlook Survey anticipate that average inflation will remain within the Bank's target range of 1 to 3 per cent over the next two years. The majority expect inflation to be in the upper half of that range. The September 2018 Consensus Economics forecast for CPI inflation is 2.4 per cent in 2018 and 2.1 per cent in 2019, with long-term annual inflation expectations averaging 2.0 per cent through 2028.
 
The outlook for inflation is subject to several upside and downside risks. Overall, the Bank assesses that the risks to the projected path for inflation are roughly balanced. The evolution of the most important risks since July is summarized in Table 4. As in past reports, the focus is on those risks identified as the most important to the projected path for inflation, drawing from a larger set of risks accounted for in the projection. Since financial vulnerabilities can magnify the impact on the economy and inflation of some adverse events, financial stability considerations are relevant in a risk-management approach to monetary policy. Macro prudential and other financial system policies can reduce financial vulnerabilities and the severity of adverse outcomes. For this reason, the Bank considers the joint evolution of financial stability risk and the macro economy when evaluating risks to the inflation outlook, especially when there are significant changes to this evolution.
 
Trade tensions between the United States and China could escalate further, and the fallout could be more severe than what is included in the projection. The largest downside risk would be associated with structural changes involving major reallocation of capital and labour across sectors and countries. In this context, Canadian exports and business investment could suffer from a significant weakening of foreign demand, a breakdown of global value chains, plummeting business confidence and lower commodity prices. At the same time, there could be inflationary supply effects stemming from the increase in global input costs and lower productivity, combined with the impact of exchange rate pass-through. On balance, there is a significant risk that the result would be lower real activity and higher inflation as this adjustment proceeds.
 
In contrast, if the United States and China were to negotiate an end to the tariffs imposed this year, global and Canadian economic activity would be stronger than in the base-case projection. As well, the near term positive impacts of tariffs on prices would be removed.
 
Some of the negative judgment associated with trade policy uncertainty in North America has been removed in the base-case projection. However, assuming that the agreement is ratified, the USMCA could also catalyze a larger improvement in business sentiment, leading to stronger investment and exports than in the base-case projection.
 
US GDP growth could be higher over the projection horizon if tax reform, deregulation or fiscal stimulus had larger positive impacts than currently embedded in the base-case projection. The resulting boost to investment, as well as stronger household spending, would have positive implications for Canadian investment and exports.
 
Global financial conditions remain broadly accommodative but could tighten suddenly. Several triggers could lead to higher term premiums and risk premiums. These include an escalation of trade tensions, faster-than-anticipated pickups in wage and price inflation in advanced economies, or significant increases in expectations of the future path of monetary policy. If premiums were to rise, the higher bond yields in advanced economies could increase capital outflows from EMEs, exacerbating country-specific vulnerabilities in some cases. These developments could translate into a decline in activity in sectors sensitive to interest rates, a rise in debt-service burdens, lower commodity prices, and weaker global and Canadian growth.
 
Elevated consumer confidence could lead to stronger consumer spending and higher inflationary pressures than in the base-case projection. In addition, a shift in housing demand to less-expensive units could free up income for consumption. If additional spending were financed by more borrowing, then vulnerabilities associated with household indebtedness could be exacerbated.
 
There has been some progress in mitigating household imbalances in certain regions. Partly reflecting the impact of various policy measures, house price growth has moderated in recent quarters and there is less evidence of speculation in some markets. Nevertheless, price levels remain high in the greater Vancouver and Toronto areas, and the economy is in a rising interest rate environment. Thus, there remains a risk of a sharp decline in house prices in these markets, which could dampen consumption, housing demand and construction activity.