At the time of the April Monetary Policy Report, it was evident that a robust economic recovery was underway in Canada. The Bank therefore began to reduce the substantial amount of monetary stimulus in the economy.
 
In the past three months, the Canadian economy has continued to register strong growth. Spending on housing and consumer durables has been much stronger than expected. Business fixed investment no longer appears to be acting as a drag on growth, with signs of recovery in investment in machinery and equipment emerging. Among Canada's major trading partners, economic growth has been broadly in line with expectations.
 
Overall, in the first half of the year, the Canadian economy grew at a faster pace than anticipated. As a result, it has moved towards full production capacity more quickly than was expected in April. In addition, core inflation has been running slightly higher than projected.
 
In light of these developments, the Bank has continued to reduce the amount of monetary stimulus in the economy by raising its target for the overnight interest rate by 25 basis points on 4 June and again on 16 July. As we look forward, given the limited amount of excess capacity in the economy and the lags involved for the effects of interest rate changes to work through the economy, the Bank must remain focused on taking the necessary actions to achieve the 2 per cent target for inflation control.
 
With monetary policy still very accommodative, economic growth in Canada could well turn out to be stronger than the Bank's revised projection presented in this Update. At the same time, there are downside risks and uncertainties regarding the outlook. Most recently, global corporate and financial market developments have been adversely affecting investor confidence, resulting in rising risk premiums and falling equity prices. The near-term strength of final sales growth in the US economy thus remains uncertain. Conditions in Latin America have deteriorated somewhat, and the geopolitical situation remains unsettled.
 
Canada's economic recovery, which began in the last quarter of 2001, gathered momentum in the first half of this year. Real GDP surged by 6 per cent at an annual rate in the first quarter of 2002 and is likely to have risen by about 4.5 per cent in the second quarter.
 
The significant easing of monetary policy during 2001 was a key factor behind the strong growth of household demand in the first half of this year. Canada's exports also rose considerably, as the US economy began to recover. At the same time, the levels of both inventories and capital spending were stronger than anticipated. Together, these developments suggest a broadening of the recovery across sectors.
 
The economy is now operating with less excess supply than was projected in the last Report. Current estimates of the Bank's conventional measure of potential output and the output gap indicate that economic slack largely disappeared in the first half of 2002. Other indicators, however, point to less pressure on capacity. For example, recent marked increases in employment have been accompanied by higher labour supply, given the greater-than-expected rise in the labour force participation rate. As well, information gathered by the Bank's regional offices does not suggest widespread capacity pressures. On balance, it is the Bank's judgment that the economy was operating at mid-year with somewhat more slack than the conventional measure of the output gap would suggest.
 
Core inflation was 2.2 per cent in May, slightly above the level projected in the April Report. Strong demand for housing and furnishings is putting upward pressure on the prices of both shelter and household durables. A large upward adjustment in the premiums for auto and home insurance has also kept the core rate up in recent months.
 
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was 1.0 per cent in May, down from 1.5 per cent in February. This reduction relative to the core rate chiefly reflected a substantial decrease in the consumer price for natural gas, itself a lagged response to last year's sharp decline in prices at the producer level.
 
Since early in the year, financial markets have reflected a divergent outlook for the Canadian and US economies and for the expected policy responses. Canadian money market instruments have tended to price in expectations of policy rate increases in Canada, whereas in US markets, participants have pushed out their timeline for the first tightening by the Federal Reserve. This has been reflected in the Canada-US spread on 2-year instruments, which has widened significantly.
 
Since the April Report, the Canadian dollar has appreciated against the US dollar. While reflecting strong Canadian economic data and wider interest rate spreads, this movement has also been part of a general weakening trend of the US dollar against all major currencies. Concerns about US corporate profitability and accounting practices, together with the large US current account deficit, have contributed to weakness in the US dollar. Against major currencies other than the US dollar, the Canadian dollar has weakened.
 
Following a robust first quarter, US economic activity is estimated to have slowed to around 2.5 per cent in the second quarter of this year, owing to slower growth in household spending and less support from inventory investment.
 
In the second half of the year, supported by ongoing stimulative policies, US economic growth should pick up. In particular, capital spending is projected to start to strengthen, and demand by households should be sustained. On an average annual basis, US real GDP is expected to grow by about 2.75 per cent this year. In 2003, economic growth is projected to average about 3.75 per cent. The downside risks to this outlook stem largely from recent corporate and financial market developments and their possible effects on corporate and household sector confidence and balance sheets.
 
In Japan, the contraction this year in economic activity is expected to be less pronounced than was anticipated in the April Report, owing partly to the somewhat faster recovery of exports. In Europe, real GDP growth is now projected to be slightly below earlier expectations because of persistent weakness in domestic demand.
 
Growth prospects for a number of emerging-market economies are expected to continue to improve, particularly in Southeast Asia. The situation in Latin America has worsened, however, as reflected in the recent sharp widening of interest rate spreads.
 
Over the next two years, the prices of non-energy commodities are projected to strengthen somewhat as the global economic expansion proceeds. Although energy prices are not expected to change significantly over the remainder of 2002, Middle East tensions continue to make these projections particularly uncertain.
 
For Canada, the Bank projects continued solid growth in aggregate demand and output. Spending by households should remain strong, although outlays on housing and related items will likely ease back from recent high levels towards the end of the forecast horizon. With the economy operating close to capacity, investment spending on machinery and equipment should contribute positively to growth in aggregate demand. As well, capital expenditures in the energy sector should increase, given expected prices for oil and gas. And foreign demand for Canadian products is projected to continue to expand.
 
At the same time, selected sectors, such as telecommunications, continue to experience financial difficulty and, more recently, there have been growing concerns emanating largely from developments abroad about business accounting practices and the interpretation of corporate financial statements. This has led to falling investor confidence and, in turn, to rising risk premiums on corporate bonds and weakness in equity markets in Canada.
 
As we go forward, it is the Bank's view that the underlying economic situation will require further reductions in the amount of monetary stimulus. The timing and pace of policy adjustments will depend on the strength of the various factors at play and the implication for pressures on capacity and on inflation.
 
Over the period to the end of 2003, the Bank projects that the rate of economic expansion in Canada will be in the range of 3 to 4 per cent. Given the current accommodative stance of policy, real GDP growth could be in the upper part of this range in the second half of this year. Further out, in the second half of 2003, growth could be in the lower part, as growth of household spending slows from current unsustainably high rates and as imports pick up. Such a profile would result in real GDP growth, on an annual average basis, of close to 3.5 per cent in both 2002 and 2003 - similar to the latest private sector consensus forecast.
 
This growth profile would return the Canadian economy to full production capacity in early 2003 - sooner than was expected in April.
 
There are both upside and downside risks to this projection. On the positive side, growth over the period could turn out to be stronger because of the amount of monetary stimulus still in place. On the negative side, there are the uncertainties associated with the recent global corporate and financial market developments and their potential effects on confidence and world economic growth.
 
With the economy projected to be in a position of balance between aggregate demand and supply starting early next year, and given underlying inflation expectations, core inflation is expected to steady out at close to 2 per cent by mid-2003.
 
Until then, core inflation is expected to remain slightly above 2 per cent and even edge up somewhat in the fourth quarter of this year from its May level. This profile is based on several factors. The effects of the recent large increases in insurance premiums and of the earlier depreciation of the Canadian dollar will persist for some time before diminishing in 2003. Changes in the amount of price discounting are also playing a major role. Intense price discounting in the fourth quarter of last year temporarily lowered core inflation. With the strong recovery, the amount of price discounting has diminished significantly. This reversal is expected to show up as a temporary increase in the 12-month rate of growth of core inflation in the fourth quarter of this year.
 
Higher energy prices and increases in tobacco taxes are expected to push total CPI inflation up close to the core rate over the next two months. Through the second half of this year, the total and core rates are expected to be broadly in line. For 2003, total CPI inflation, like core inflation, is projected to level out near 2 per cent.