The global economy has continued to expand robustly. However, US economic growth slowed in 2006, with the weakness concentrated in the automotive and housing sectors. This weakness does not appear to have spread to the rest of the US economy and, with signs that a significant amount of the adjustment in these sectors has already taken place, US economic growth is expected to pick up.
 
With reduced demand for Canadian exports and the need to adjust inventories, output growth in Canada decelerated more than had been expected in the October Report, likely averaging about 1.6 per cent in the second half of last year. The Bank judges that at the end of 2006, the Canadian economy was operating at, or just above, its production capacity.
 
Looking ahead, real GDP growth should average about 2 1/2 per cent in the first half of 2007, rising to about 2 3/4 per cent in the second half. In 2008, growth is projected to stay in line with the growth of potential output (estimated at 2.8 per cent), keeping the economy operating near its capacity throughout the projection period. With the weakness seen in the second half of 2006, this growth profile implies average annual growth of 2.3 per cent in 2007 and 2.8 per cent in 2008.
 
Total consumer price inflation will continue to be affected by movements in energy prices and, during the first half of 2007, by last year's reduction in the Goods and Services Tax. If energy prices unfold in line with current futures prices, total CPI inflation should fall to about 1 per cent in the first half of 2007, returning to the 2 per cent target early in 2008. With the economy operating near its production potential, and with slightly less upward pressure from housing prices, core inflation should return to 2 per cent in the first half of 2007 and stay there throughout the projection period.
 
The Bank judges that the risks to its inflation projection are roughly balanced. The main downside risk continues to be that growth in the US economy could be lower than expected. The main upside risk comes from rising house prices and increased spending related to borrowing against home equity. Both these upside and downside risks have diminished somewhat since the October Report.
 
There remains a small possibility of a disorderly resolution of global imbalances, in the absence of further appropriate policy actions internationally.
 
There also continues to be considerable uncertainty about Canadian trend productivity growth. Recent productivity data have been weak, and it is unclear how much of that weakness is due to cyclical factors.
 
The Bank of Canada left the target rate for the overnight rate unchanged at 4.25 per cent on 5 December 2006 and 16 January 2007. In line with the Bank's outlook, the current level of the policy rate is judged, at this time, to be consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target over the medium term.
 
Since the October Report, the global economic expansion has remained robust. Economic growth in the euro area over the past few months has been slightly stronger than projected, and growth in China continues to outperform expectations. In Japan, business investment and exports remain vigorous despite relatively weak household consumption. The stronger overseas demand, particularly in business investment, along with a modest real effective depreciation of the US dollar over the past year and a half, continues to support US exports and is consistent with the Bank's assumption of an orderly resolution of global imbalances.
 
With this continuing strength in global demand, commodity prices have remained high since the October Report. Oil and natural gas prices have recently eased, however, owing to warmer-than-usual temperatures in North America.
 
After a strong start to 2006, real GDP growth in the United States moderated. This mainly reflected a substantial downturn in residential investment and reduced motor vehicle production. More broadly, the need to adjust inventory levels is also dampening manufacturing production, and business investment is somewhat less buoyant than previously expected. But adjustments in the housing and auto sectors have not led to significant spillover effects in the rest of the US economy. Household consumption has remained firm, supported by steady employment gains in the services sector.
 
With the slower growth in the US economy, output growth in Canada has also decelerated. In the third quarter, real GDP grew at an annual rate of 1.7 per cent. While this was slightly less than projected in our October Report, the level of real GDP in the third quarter was as anticipated because of an upward revision to growth in the first quarter. Based on available information, real GDP is likely to have grown by about 1.5 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2006, weaker than the 2.8 per cent rate projected in the October Report.
 
This slowdown in growth in the second half of 2006 was largely due to reduced US demand for building materials and motor vehicles - which has adversely affected Canada's exports - and to the need for Canadian businesses to adjust inventories. This inventory adjustment appears to have been related largely, but not entirely, to weaker US demand for Canadian goods.
 
Final domestic demand remains the key contributor to growth in Canada. Strength in labour markets and real personal disposable income, together with increases in household net worth and household credit, has continued to support solid growth in consumer spending.
 
After reviewing all the indicators of capacity pressures, it is the Governing Council's judgment that the economy was operating at, or just above, its production capacity in the fourth quarter of 2006.
 
A number of indicators suggest that the economy was operating above its production capacity. In the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey, the percentage of companies reporting that they would have difficulties in meeting an unanticipated increase in demand was still above average. The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap suggests that the economy was operating just above its production potential in the fourth quarter. The employment-to-population ratio remained very high in December compared with historical experience, and the unemployment rate was at a 30-year low. The core rate of inflation has been slightly above 2 per cent in recent months.
 
On the other hand, the underlying trend increase in wages (based on average hourly earnings of permanent workers) has eased to a range of 2.5 to 3.5 per cent in recent months, after moving up earlier in 2006. As well, the percentage of firms reporting labour shortages in the Bank's winter survey was slightly below average.
 
In recent months, total CPI inflation has been slightly lower than projected in the October Report. The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI fell to just below 1 per cent in September and October 2006. This mainly reflected anticipated base-year effects associated with the hurricane-related surge in energy prices in September of 2005, and unanticipated declines in the prices of gasoline and natural gas. Total CPI inflation moved up to 1.4 per cent in November as the base-year effects dissipated.
 
From September to November of 2006, the core rate of inflation averaged about 2.2 per cent, up from 2 per cent in July and August. This increase was largely because core prices for shelter and other services rose at a slightly faster rate, although more recently there are some indications of a moderation in the rate of increase in housing prices. Decreases in the prices of many import-intensive goods continued to put downward pressure on core inflation.
 
The four-quarter change in the chain price index for GDP eased from 3.0 per cent in the second quarter of 2006 to 1.4 per cent in the third quarter, reflecting a further reduction in Canada's terms of trade. This caused further moderation in the year-to-year increase in nominal GDP.
 
Long-term interest rates, market volatility, and credit spreads have remained low in most countries. In addition, many equity indexes have recently recorded either multi-year or all-time highs.
 
Against this backdrop, financing conditions in Canada remain favourable. Financial institutions and markets continue to be willing to lend, since business profitability and overall financial health remain strong. Growth of business credit is near its historical average, and the modest decline experienced since early 2006 likely reflects a slight moderation in demand rather than a tightening in the supply of credit. The pace of growth in household credit remains well above its historical average, although it has declined somewhat since the last Report. This strong growth has been partly associated with borrowing against home equity. Growth rates of the narrow and broad monetary aggregates have continued to increase.
 
Over the past three months, the Canadian dollar has moved from a high of 89.5 cents US to a low of close to 84.5 cents US. This reflects a number of factors, including the recent weakness in energy prices and an unwinding of support from cross-border currency flows related to mergers and acquisitions.
 
The Bank's base-case projection incorporates the following key assumptions: energy prices evolving in line with current futures prices, a gradual real effective depreciation of the US dollar, and a Canada/US exchange rate in the range of 84.5 to 87.5 cents US, evident since the December interest rate announcement.
 
The robust expansion of the global economy is still expected to decelerate to a more sustainable rate over 2007-08. As in the October Report, global economic growth is projected to ease from 5.1 per cent in 2006 to 4.7 per cent in 2007, and to 4.5 per cent in 2008.
 
In the base-case scenario for the US economy, real GDP growth is expected to recover to the rate of growth in potential output in the second half of 2007 before moving slightly above potential growth through 2008. On an annual basis, growth is projected to be 2.5 per cent in 2007 and 3.2 per cent in 2008 (very close to the projection in the October Report).
 
Futures prices for crude oil and natural gas are lower than those in the October Report, with prices for crude oil moving up from current levels of about US$53 per barrel to about US$59 on average in 2007 and about US$63 in 2008. The price index for non-energy commodities is still expected to decrease modestly over the projection period from the very high levels reached towards the end of 2006.
 
In the Bank's base-case projection for Canada, economic growth picks up through 2007, with quarterly growth averaging about 2.5 per cent at annual rates in the first half of the year and about 2.75 per cent in the second half. Together with the weaker growth experienced in the second half of 2006, this implies annual average growth for 2007 of 2.3 per cent. For 2008, growth is projected to continue at a pace of 2.8 per cent, in line with the growth of potential output. This implies that the economy would continue to operate near its production capacity throughout the entire projection period.
 
Strong domestic demand in Canada continues to be a key feature of the base-case projection.
 
However, Canadian export growth is expected to remain weak in the near term, recovering gradually through 2007 and 2008. At the same time, pronounced gains in investment in machinery and equipment should boost imports further. Consequently, net exports should continue to exert a considerable drag on overall growth in 2007, with this effect diminishing over the projection period.
 
The inventory adjustment evident in the second half of 2006 is expected to be largely completed early in 2007 and, therefore, would no longer subtract from growth.
 
The projection for core inflation is little changed from that in the October Report. With the economy expected to remain close to its production potential and with easing housing price pressures, core inflation is expected to return to 2 per cent in the first half of 2007 and remain there throughout the projection period.
 
In 2007, movements in the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI will be importantly influenced by the GST cut in July 2006 and by developments in the markets for crude oil, gasoline, and natural gas. Total CPI inflation is expected to average just above 1 per cent in the first half of 2007, before returning to the 2 per cent target by early 2008.
 
The current level of the policy rate is consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target in this base-case projection.