Global economic growth has evolved broadly as anticipated in the January Monetary Policy Report. In the United States, the expansion is continuing at a modest pace, with gradually strengthening private demand partly offset by accelerated fiscal consolidation. Significant policy easing has been introduced in Japan. The euro area remains in recession, however, and economic activity is being constrained by fiscal austerity, low confidence and tight credit conditions. After picking up sharply in the second half of 2012, growth in China has eased. Commodity prices received by Canadian producers remain elevated by historical standards and, overall, they are little changed since the last Report.
 
Global economic activity is expected to grow modestly in 2013, at a rate of 3.0 per cent, before strengthening to 3.6 per cent in 2014 and 3.8 per cent in 2015. The Bank's base-case projection is predicated on the assumption that the crisis in the euro area will continue to be contained.
 
In response to significant excess capacity and declining inflationary pressures, central banks in some advanced economies have provided additional, substantial unconventional monetary easing while keeping policy interest rates at historically low levels. These actions have helped to anchor medium-term inflation expectations and support stimulative global financial conditions.
 
Global financial conditions have generally eased since the last Report as market participants have become more confident about the resilience of the global recovery. In particular, global tail risks associated with near-term US fiscal policy have diminished. Markets are showing increased signs of differentiating among individual countries and financial assets, as demonstrated by the recent decline in co-movements in asset prices.
 
In the United States, financial conditions have remained highly stimulative. Monetary policy, combined with signs of strengthening private demand, has supported market confidence. While yields on long-term government bonds remain low, equity prices have reached record-high levels. Corporate credit markets continue to be robust, and yields have stabilized near recent record lows.
 
Financial conditions in Japan have improved further since the last Report, reflecting the unexpectedly bold monetary stimulus measures that were announced recently. Japanese equity prices have substantially outperformed all major equity market indexes since January, and the Nikkei index has reached its highest level since the summer of 2008. Government bond yields have fallen despite higher inflation expectations, and there has been a marked depreciation of the yen.
 
In the euro area, there has been a deterioration in market sentiment stemming from a number of factors, including weakening economic conditions, political uncertainty in Italy, the unsettling aspects of the financial assistance program in Cyprus and difficulties in implementing required fiscal austerity measures in Portugal. Consequently, unlike other advanced economies, equity indexes in the euro area, especially bank sub-indexes, have fallen. Although funding conditions for Italy have deteriorated somewhat, owing to increased investor caution, there has been some differentiation among peripheral sovereigns. For example, yields on Irish bonds have fallen, reflecting progress toward fiscal adjustment and the implementation of structural reforms.
 
Strengthening private domestic demand and a gradual firming in external conditions are expected to underpin the US economic expansion, while fiscal consolidation and, to a diminishing extent, household deleveraging will continue to weigh on growth.
 
US real GDP rose marginally in the fourth quarter of 2012, as solid underlying private demand was largely offset by outsized declines in some volatile components of spending. Real GDP growth is estimated to have rebounded in the first quarter, boosted by higher growth in consumption, although the second quarter is projected to be weaker as fiscal drag intensifies. On a quarterly basis, economic growth is then expected to pick up to around 3.5 per cent by early 2014, before moderating over the balance of the projection horizon. On an annual average basis, growth in US real GDP is expected to be 2.0 per cent in 2013, 3.1 per cent in 2014 and 3.3 per cent in 2015.
 
Ongoing public sector deleveraging remains the strongest headwind facing the US economy. The drag on US real GDP growth from fiscal consolidation is expected to rise from 1.0 percentage point in 2012 to 1.8 percentage points in 2013, before declining to 0.8 percentage points in 2014. These estimates include a revision to the timing of automatic spending cuts (known as "sequestration"). As a result, the drag from fiscal policy is now more front-loaded than expected in the Bank's January projection, although the cumulative effect over the 2013-14 period has been revised down.
 
In light of the constraining effects of fiscal consolidation and private deleveraging, monetary policy is projected to remain highly stimulative through 2015. Consistent with guidance provided by the Federal Open Market Committee, the federal funds rate is expected to stay at exceptionally low levels, for at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6.5 per cent, projected inflation one and two years out is no more than 2.5 per cent, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored. To provide further policy accommodation, the Federal Reserve is also expected to continue to purchase agency mortgage-backed securities and longer-term US Treasuries.
 
Consumer spending has been solid since the beginning of 2013, although it is being affected by the 2 per cent rise in payroll taxes that took effect in January. Consumption is projected to be supported by rising labour income, low debt-financing costs and better access to credit. In addition, the drag from household deleveraging is expected to diminish over the projection horizon, given the considerable progress households have made in repairing their balance sheets.
 
The recovery in the housing market continues to gain traction. Housing starts, sales of new and existing homes, and builder and realtor sentiment have all improved noticeably. Importantly, house prices have started to increase after five years of declines. Residential construction should continue to grow at a solid pace, underpinned by gradually improving labour market conditions, underlying demographic demand, low mortgage interest rates and an expected improvement in access to credit.
 
Fundamentals for business fixed investment remain quite favourable. US corporations have strong balance sheets and can obtain market financing at a very low cost. Following some volatility at the turn of the year caused by uncertainty related to the impending fiscal cliff, business investment is now anticipated to grow at a robust pace. Non-residential construction is also expected to recover, reflecting buoyant investment activity in the US oil and gas sector as well as a gradual improvement in the commercial real estate sector.
 
Firming foreign demand is projected to support a steady rise in US exports through 2015, while stronger domestic demand should stimulate the growth of imports. Oil imports, however, especially of light crude, are expected to be increasingly displaced by growing US production.
 
US inflationary pressures remain weak. The price index for core personal consumption expenditures has risen at an annual rate of only 1.1 per cent over the past three months, although medium-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored. A modest rise in US inflation is anticipated over the projection horizon, however, as the excess supply gap is gradually reduced.
 
Real GDP in the euro area decreased at an annual rate of 2.3 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2012, the largest drop since the 2008-09 recession. Germany's real GDP declined by 2.4 per cent owing to weak investment and exports, particularly exports to the United States. As well, activity in many peripheral economies continued to contract, dampened by the negative effects of fiscal austerity, low confidence and tight credit conditions. The transmission of monetary policy to the peripheral countries remains impaired, with market segmentation leading to persistently high bank lending rates, especially for small and medium-sized corporations.
 
Economic activity in the euro area is expected to decline further during the first half of 2013, although at a slower pace. A gradual recovery, initially supported by external demand, should then take hold. Domestic demand is not expected to become a significant driver of economic growth until late 2014, when the negative effects of tight lending conditions and fiscal consolidation begin to dissipate. On an average annual basis, real GDP in the euro area is expected to decline by 0.6 per cent in 2013, before rising by 0.8 per cent in 2014 and 1.4 per cent in 2015. Significant differences in the economic conditions of the core and peripheral economies are expected to persist. Relative to expectations at the time of the January Report, the outlook for the euro area has been revised downward.
 
Headline CPI inflation in the euro area has eased in recent months, falling to 1.7 per cent on a year-over-year basis in March. The decline occurred despite the impact of increases in indirect taxes, which is estimated to have added up to 0.4 percentage points. Given the large excess supply gap, inflation is expected to decline further over the projection horizon.
 
Although the crisis in the euro area remains contained, the financial crisis in Cyprus and political uncertainty in Italy highlight ongoing vulnerabilities. To move the euro area onto a more sustainable growth trajectory, structural reforms to enhance competitiveness and further progress toward a banking union, as well as fiscal integration, will be needed.
 
Real GDP in Japan grew by 0.2 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2012, following two consecutive quarterly declines. Long-standing weakness and deflationary pressures have prompted the Japanese authorities to undertake more significant policy measures, including additional fiscal stimulus. Most importantly, the Bank of Japan has moved to a 2 per cent inflation target and has recently announced a number of bold new measures designed to achieve this goal within two years - almost doubling the monetary base to ¥270 trillion (or 54 per cent of GDP) by the end of 2014, primarily through the purchase of longer-term Japanese government bonds.
 
This substantial policy easing will help boost the growth of domestic demand in Japan over the projection horizon. The recent sharp depreciation of the yen, coupled with an increase in external demand, is also expected to spur a significant rebound in exports. However, planned increases in the value-added tax in 2014 and 2015 may dampen growth somewhat. Prospects for economic growth in Japan have been revised upward since the January Report, as the positive effect of more accommodative monetary policy more than offsets the negative influence of a downward revision to the Bank's view on Japan's potential output growth.
 
Real GDP growth in China slowed in the first quarter, following a pickup to very strong growth rates in the second half of 2012. Ongoing momentum in the residential real estate sector and renewed increases in home prices have raised concerns about imbalances in the sector, prompting Chinese policy-makers to introduce additional measures to limit housing demand.
 
China's real GDP growth is expected to stabilize in a range between 7.5 per cent and 8 per cent over the next three years, reflecting policy actions taken to dampen the buildup of domestic imbalances. Growth in investment spending is projected to slow gradually, as public infrastructure investment moderates and the housing sector stabilizes in response to the new, more restrictive policy measures. In contrast, the growth of consumer spending is expected to gain momentum, fuelled by solid increases in wages and employment, as well as ongoing structural reforms. A rebound in exports is also anticipated, consistent with improving demand in advanced economies, but will likely be tempered by a projected appreciation in the real value of the renminbi.
 
Economic activity has picked up in several other emerging-market economies. While the improvement has been most pronounced in emerging Asia and parts of Latin America, there are sizable differences in economic conditions across and within regions. Growth in Mexico continues to be relatively strong, and economic growth in Brazil has firmed, although it remains below potential. An exception in emerging Asia has been India, where growth has slowed because of reductions in government spending, a disappointing summer harvest and ongoing supply-side constraints. Overall, economic activity in EMEs is projected to strengthen over the projection horizon, supported by continued policy stimulus and increasing external demand.
 
Commodity prices remain high by historical standards. Modest global demand and increased supply, however, have led to a 14 per cent decline in the Bank of Canada's commodity price index from its most recent peak in April 2011. The BCPI is little changed since the January Report, as higher prices for Western Canada Select crude oil, natural gas and lumber have been offset by declines in other components.
 
The Bank's crude oil price index is up about 7 per cent since the January Report, supported by the recovery in the price of WCS, which has jumped to US$80 per barrel from a recent low of US$55 per barrel in December. However, other benchmark prices for oil, such as Brent and West Texas Intermediate , have decreased. The rebound in the price for WCS is related to both increased use of rail transportation and a temporary reduction in production, which have eased constraints caused by insufficient pipeline capacity. As a result, the spread between WTI and WCS prices has returned closer to its historical norm of about US$15 per barrel.
 
Based on the latest futures curves, Brent and WTI prices are expected to decline slightly over the projection horizon, and the spread between these benchmark prices is anticipated to narrow modestly. The gap between WTI and WCS prices is expected to widen somewhat, in response to an increase in Canadian production.
 
Natural gas prices have continued to rise in recent months, increasing by about 20 per cent since the January Report. At US$4.20 per million BTU, however, prices remain well below the average level of US$5.60 recorded over the past ten years. According to the latest futures curve, natural gas prices are expected to increase steadily, reaching US$4.50 per million BTU by the end of 2015.
 
Prices for non-energy commodities have fallen by about 4 per cent since the last Report. Base metals prices have been on a declining trend since 2011, in line with slowing global economic growth, notably in China. Slower growth in demand, combined with increased supply, has led to a marked buildup of inventories. As a result, base metals prices are expected to remain weak over the near term, before firming modestly with the projected strengthening in global activity. Lumber prices are expected to continue rising in coming years, albeit at a more modest pace, since the impact of increased demand for lumber from the US housing sector will be partly offset by expanding supply. Prices for agricultural products are somewhat lower than in January and are expected to decrease further over the projection horizon, as crop yields rebound from drought-reduced levels.
 
Demand for Canada's non-commodity exports remains well below its pre-recession peak. The foreign activity measure has regained only 70 per cent of the decline registered during the 2008-09 recession, largely reflecting the still-low level of activity in the US housing sector. Nevertheless, demand for Canadian exports is expected to grow solidly over the projection horizon, mainly underpinned by the continued recovery in the US housing market and robust growth in US business investment. Notably, growing production of light crude oil in the United States is not expected to have a significant impact on Canadian exports of heavy crude. Commodity prices, which, in aggregate, are still at historically high levels, should continue to support Canada's terms of trade and gross domestic income.
 
The Canadian dollar has averaged 98 cents US since the March fixed announcement date, compared with the 101 cents US assumed in January. It is assumed to remain at 98 cents US over the projection horizon.
 
Following a weak second half of 2012, economic growth in Canada is projected to regain some momentum through 2013 as net exports pick up and business fixed investment returns to more solid growth. Consumer spending is expected to grow at a moderate pace over the projection horizon, while residential investment declines further from historically high levels. Growth in total household credit has slowed and the Bank continues to expect that the household debt-to-income ratio will stabilize near current levels. Despite the projected recovery in exports, they are likely to remain below their pre-recession peak until the second half of 2014, owing to restrained foreign demand and ongoing competitiveness challenges, including the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar.
 
The outlook for the Canadian economy is slightly weaker than forecast in the January Report, with government spending now assumed to make an even smaller contribution to real GDP growth. Business investment growth is also projected to be somewhat weaker, reflecting ongoing challenges in the resource sector and firms' broader concerns regarding the strength of global and domestic demand. As a result, the Bank now sees the Canadian economy returning to full capacity only in mid-2015.
 
Total and core CPI inflation have remained low in recent months, broadly in line with expectations in the January Report, although there has been considerable monthly volatility. Both inflation measures are projected to remain well below 2 per cent in coming quarters, reflecting the material slack in the economy, heightened competitive pressures in the retail sector, and some special factors such as slower increases in regulated prices and the pass-through of previous declines in agricultural prices to consumer prices. As the economy returns to full capacity, and with inflation expectations well anchored, inflation is projected to rise gradually to the 2 per cent target by mid-2015.
 
Reflecting in part the considerable monetary policy accommodation in place, the supply and price of credit for businesses and households in Canada remain very stimulative, continuing to provide important support to the economic expansion.
 
Canadian debt markets have generally remained strong in recent months. Yields on corporate bonds have edged down from their already exceptionally low levels, reflecting both a decline in yields on Canadian government bonds and a further narrowing in credit spreads. Canadian equity markets, however, have underperformed equity markets in some other advanced economies since the January Report.
 
Additional evidence that credit conditions for Canadian firms continue to be very stimulative is provided by the responses of firms surveyed in the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey and those of financial institutions surveyed in the latest Senior Loan Officer Survey. Responses to these surveys indicate that, on balance, borrowing conditions are little changed since last autumn, following a period of almost uninterrupted easing since late 2009. Nonetheless, some tightening has been reported for smaller firms in the resource sector.
 
The favourable lending conditions offered to Canadian firms by financial institutions partly reflect the ongoing access by Canadian banks to low-cost funding across the term structure in both Canadian and foreign currencies.
 
The growth of total business credit has remained well above its historical average, stimulated by the highly advantageous financing conditions. Some moderation has been seen in recent months, however, partly reflecting the unwinding of transitory factors. In particular, bond issuance by non-financial corporations has slowed following rapid growth in the fourth quarter of 2012, which was boosted by the early refinancing of corporate debt at favourable interest rate levels, according to industry consultations. In spite of the recent slowing, total business credit is still growing considerably faster than business investment.
 
As expected, growth in total household credit has continued to moderate despite near-record-low borrowing rates. The cumulative effects of changes to mortgage insurance rules and the tightening of mortgage underwriting guidelines, an increasing appreciation among consumers of the risks associated with elevated debt levels, and the tightening bias of the Bank of Canada have all contributed to this moderation. With household credit growth slowing to a pace close to that of disposable income in the fourth quarter, the aggregate household debt-to-income ratio remained roughly unchanged from the previous quarter at 165 per cent. The Bank continues to anticipate that the debt-to-income ratio will stabilize near current levels.
 
Growth in the narrow monetary aggregates has picked up noticeably since the beginning of the year, coincident with other indicators that suggest a firming in GDP growth. Growth in the broad monetary aggregates has also increased over the same period, largely owing to the contribution from narrow money. Nonetheless, the overall trend in broad money remains consistent with subdued inflationary pressures ahead.
 
Output-related indicators suggest that a material degree of slack has re-emerged in the Canadian economy, as real GDP expanded at a rate below that of the economy's production potential throughout 2012. Real GDP grew by 0.6 per cent (at annual rates) in the fourth quarter, with solid advances across most domestic components of GDP offset by an unexpectedly large reduction in inventory investment. The Bank estimates that real GDP growth picked up to 1.5 per cent in the first quarter of 2013, driven primarily by a stabilization in inventory investment as well as higher exports, which in turn were supported by improved global demand and the passing of the temporary factors that restrained activity in the energy sector through the second half of 2012. These rates of growth in output are slightly weaker than had been anticipated in the January Report, leaving the level of real GDP in the first quarter of 2013 0.3 per cent below the level expected at that time. Consistent with these dynamics, the Bank's conventional measure of the output gap widened slightly to -1.2 per cent in the first quarter of 2013.
 
On balance, responses to the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey also indicate a material degree of slack in the Canadian economy. The proportion of firms that would have difficulty meeting an unexpected increase in demand remains below the level seen over much of the past two years and below its historical average. The proportion of firms reporting labour shortages declined further in the latest survey, remaining below the survey average.
 
Labour market indicators more generally continue to suggest the persistence of slack, although to varying degrees. While the monthly employment data have been volatile, the unemployment rate declined to an average of 7.1 per cent in the first quarter, the lowest rate since the end of 2008. However, the average duration of unemployment and the proportion of involuntary part-time workers remain at elevated levels. In addition, wage growth has moderated in recent quarters.
 
On balance, the Bank judges that the economy was operating about 1 1/4 per cent below its production capacity in the first quarter of 2013, a slightly larger degree of slack than expected in the January Report.
 
The Bank continues to forecast a pickup in real GDP growth through 2013 and some rebalancing of aggregate demand in Canada. With external demand projected to grow solidly and some of the challenges in the resource sector expected to be addressed over time, the contributions to growth from net exports and business fixed investment are forecast to increase. Growth in household spending is projected to be relatively modest, reflecting continued moderate increases in consumption and further declines in residential investment. The contribution of government spending to GDP is expected to remain at levels well below its historical average.
 
On a quarterly basis, economic growth in Canada is expected to rise from the 1.5 per cent estimated for the first quarter of 2013 to 2.5 per cent in the second half of 2013 and 3.0 per cent in the first half of 2014. Despite this expected pickup, the weak output growth through the second half of 2012 causes real GDP growth on an annual average basis to dip to 1.5 per cent in 2013 from 1.8 per cent in 2012. The economy is then expected to grow by 2.8 per cent in 2014 and by 2.7 per cent in 2015, well above the estimated growth of potential output.
 
The level of economic activity over the projection horizon is somewhat lower than in the January Report. This reflects downward revisions to growth in government spending, in line with the latest budget announcements from all levels of government. It also reflects a slightly lower profile for business fixed investment, owing to firms' heightened concerns regarding the strength of demand as well as volatility in the prices received by Canadian oil producers.
 
Household spending has evolved broadly as expected in recent quarters. Consumption has risen at about the same pace as disposable income, holding the savings rate roughly stable at slightly below 4 per cent and continuing to restrain the need for consumer credit. At the same time, residential investment has declined further from historically high levels, owing to lower rates of new construction. Housing starts dropped markedly in the first quarter to an average of about 177,000 units, after remaining above demographic demand (estimated at roughly 185,000 units) over the past two years. Despite the recent moderation in the rate of new housing construction, there are still signs of overbuilding, particularly of multiple-unit dwellings in some urban areas. The resale housing market has shown some signs of stabilization in recent months, following the easing in both activity and prices from the high levels reached between the latter part of 2011 and early 2012. Still, valuations in some segments of the housing market remain stretched.
 
As in the January Report, the outlook for household spending reflects some ongoing restraint by Canadian households related to high levels of debt. Consumption is still expected to grow at a moderate rate over the projection horizon, in line with the growth of disposable income. Residential investment is anticipated to decline further as overbuilding begins to be addressed, contributing to a more sustainable path for the housing sector. In this regard, the share of residential investment in the overall economy is projected to decline toward its historical average .
 
The Bank expects growth in business fixed investment to return to a more solid pace through 2013 after slowing through the second half of 2012. This slowdown, which was concentrated in the resource sector, appears to have reflected both sector-specific challenges and more general concerns about the outlook for global and domestic demand. The projection for more solid investment growth continues to be supported by the healthy aggregate financial position of Canadian firms, favourable credit conditions and the strong Canadian dollar, as well as the impetus to improve productivity amid heightened pressures to become more competitive. However, there are signs that the factors that have recently been weighing on investment growth are likely to persist for some time. Responses to the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey point to moderate growth in business fixed investment over the near term, with many firms reporting that uncertainty regarding economic developments is influencing their investment plans and decisions, most frequently leading them to postpone projects. Statistics Canada's latest annual survey of private and public investment also implies only a gradual rise in business investment growth in the quarters ahead, with the average annual nominal rate of growth in 2013 projected to be down from 2012, notably in the resource sector. Against this backdrop, the Bank now forecasts a more subdued pickup in the growth rate of business fixed investment than was anticipated in the January Report.
 
Government spending is expected to contribute only very marginally to real GDP growth over the projection horizon. While this contribution is considerably weaker than has been typical historically, it is in line with the plans of federal, provincial and local governments to consolidate spending. The profile for government spending is lower than in the January Report, reflecting spending plans announced in recent budgets at all levels of government, as well as the latest information provided by the National Accounts.
 
The Bank expects net exports to provide a rising, although still relatively modest, contribution to GDP growth over the next two years. Available indicators suggest a continued pickup in exports in early 2013 following a sharp contraction in the third quarter of 2012, which resulted in part from temporary disruptions in the energy sector. Exports are projected to continue to grow at a solid pace thereafter, consistent with the strengthening of private sector demand in the United States and the projected recovery in the global economy more broadly. However, the growth of exports continues to be restrained by ongoing competitiveness challenges, including the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar, which is being influenced by safe-haven flows and spillovers from global monetary policy. These challenges, coupled with the still-weak level of foreign demand, suggest that Canada's exports will not regain their pre-recession peak until the second half of 2014.
 
Relative to the January Report, net exports have been revised up somewhat in 2014, reflecting the slightly higher level of foreign demand relative to domestic demand. With modest improvements in the real trade balance, Canada's sizable current account deficit, which is currently around 4 per cent of GDP, is projected to narrow gradually over the forecast horizon.
 
Given the above projection for real GDP, the Canadian economy is expected to reach full capacity in mid-2015, later than anticipated in the January Report.
 
Total and core CPI inflation have remained low in recent months, broadly in line with expectations in the January Report. There has been considerable monthly volatility, however, largely related to movements in auto prices.
 
The low level of core inflation, at an average of 1.2 per cent in January and February, reflects muted price pressures across a wide range of goods and services. This is consistent with the material excess capacity in the economy as well as heightened competitive pressures on retailers from both domestic and foreign sources. The continued expansion of big-box stores in Canada and the arrival of large US retailers have been factors, as has the rise in online shopping. There has also been an increase in cross-border shopping, stimulated by the persistent strength in the Canadian dollar and the rise in travellers' duty-free exemptions for short stays implemented in June 2012. In addition, a number of special factors have put downward pressure on core inflation in recent quarters, including slower increases in regulated prices (such as auto insurance) and the relatively large impact of past declines in the world prices of agricultural commodities on food and clothing prices in Canada.
 
Total CPI inflation, which averaged 0.9 per cent in January and February, has been restrained by low core inflation as well as by declining mortgage interest costs, although this has been offset in part by higher prices for gasoline in recent months.
 
Inflation expectations remain well anchored. As reported in the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey, 93 per cent of firms surveyed expect average inflation over the next two years to remain within the 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range. A majority of firms now expect inflation to be in the lower half of that range, consistent with the Bank's inflation projection. The April Consensus Economics forecasts for total CPI inflation were 1.4 per cent in 2013 and 1.8 per cent in 2014. Market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations also continue to be consistent with the 2 per cent inflation-control target.
 
Core inflation is expected to remain subdued in coming quarters before rising gradually to 2 per cent by mid-2015, as the economy returns to full capacity, the special factors that are weighing on core inflation subside, and inflation expectations remain well anchored. In addition, while wage growth has been relatively subdued recently, partly because of ongoing public sector wage restraints, productivity growth has been weak. As a result, growth in unit labour costs has risen in recent quarters, which is expected to contribute to the anticipated gradual rise in core inflation. The projection for core inflation is slightly lower than in the January Report owing to the greater-than-anticipated slack in the Canadian economy over most of the projection horizon.
 
Total CPI inflation is projected to remain near 1 per cent through a large part of 2013, owing to low core inflation as well as the dampening impact of lower mortgage interest costs. Thereafter, total CPI inflation is expected to return gradually to target by mid-2015. The profile for total inflation is somewhat lower than in the January Report, mainly because of more subdued core inflation.
 
This projection includes a gradual reduction in monetary stimulus over the projection horizon, consistent with achieving the inflation target.
 
The uncertainty surrounding the Bank's inflation projection is illustrated using fan charts. Chart 37 and Chart 38 depict the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the second quarter of 2013 to the end of 2015.
 
The inflation outlook in Canada is subject to upside and downside risks, which are similar to those identified in the January Report.
 
The three main upside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the possibility of stronger-than-expected growth in the US and global economies, a sharper-than-expected rebound in Canadian exports, and renewed momentum in Canadian residential investment.
 
Private sector demand in the United States has been stronger than expected, and could continue to surprise on the upside given the degree of household deleveraging that has already taken place. In addition, the extraordinary monetary policy measures recently adopted by a number of countries could have a larger-than-anticipated effect on global demand and commodity prices.
 
Growth in Canadian exports could be stronger than expected if exporters improve their competitiveness more rapidly than currently assumed. The unexpected weakness in exports in the second half of 2012 could also give way to a sharper rebound in 2013.
 
While residential investment in Canada has declined as expected after reaching record-high levels, it could regain momentum, adding to domestic demand for a time but reinforcing existing imbalances.
 
The three main downside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the European crisis, more protracted weakness in business investment and exports in Canada, and the possibility that growth in Canadian household spending could be weaker.
 
Failure to contain the crisis in Europe remains the most serious risk facing the global and Canadian economies. Even if the crisis stays contained, there is a risk that the weakness in Europe could be more protracted and that uncertainty could remain elevated for longer than presently projected.
 
The projected pickup in Canadian economic growth through 2013 relies heavily on an improvement in business investment and net exports. There is a risk that the recent poor performance could be extended longer than expected, particularly if external demand is weaker or if commodity prices are less supportive.
 
Continuing high household debt levels in Canada could lead to weaker household spending. Relatedly, if there were a sudden weakening in the Canadian housing sector, it could have sizable spillover effects on other areas of the economy.
 
Overall, the Bank judges that the risks to the inflation outlook in Canada are roughly balanced over the projection horizon.