The global economy improved in the second half of 2016, and economic growth is forecast to continue to strengthen over the projection horizon. In particular, growth in real gross domestic product in the United States picked up after a weak first half of the year and is expected to remain solid. Meanwhile, contractionary pressures appear to have reached a trough in some emerging-market economies. Overall, global economic growth is projected to increase from just under 3 per cent in 2016 to about 3 1/2 per cent by 2018.
 
The outlook, however, is subject to considerable uncertainty, given the unknowns around policy actions by the incoming US administration, particularly concerning trade. These potential policy changes pose important risks to the current projection, which will be updated in future reports as additional details become available.
 
Yields on long-term government bonds in the United States have risen to levels prevailing in mid-2015. This increase mainly reflects market expectations of a shift in the policy mix under the incoming US administration, with an anticipated fiscal expansion bringing higher growth, inflation and policy interest rates. Long-term yields have also risen in many other advanced and emerging economies, albeit to a lesser degree. Ongoing monetary policy stimulus has limited the rise in yields in the euro area and Japan.
 
In this context, the US dollar has continued to appreciate against most other advanced and emerging-market currencies, reaching its highest level in nearly 15 years on a nominal trade-weighted basis. This exchange rate adjustment should help to redistribute global demand. At the same time, positive market sentiment about the US economy has led to increased portfolio outflows from several EMEs since the October Report, contributing to a tightening in financial conditions in some of these economies.
 
Expectations of stronger US growth have also supported a rally in stock markets in advanced economies. The presumption that the incoming US administration will cut corporate taxes and roll back regulations has likely contributed to strong gains in US equities with domestic exposures.
 
The underlying dynamics of the US economy remain largely as outlined in the October projection. Growth is expected to rebound in the second half of 2016 after a weaker first half, in part reflecting the positive contribution of inventory investment. The growth profile for 2017 and 2018 has been revised upward, by about 0.1 and 0.3 percentage points, respectively, taking into account initial assumptions about the anticipated shift in fiscal policy. Stronger growth prospects are reflected in improvements in indicators of business optimism and consumer confidence.
 
While the nature and timing of fiscal policy changes in the United States are unknown, the base-case projection for the US economy embeds an element of fiscal expansion, which boosts the level of GDP by about 0.5 per cent by the end of 2018. Considerable uncertainty remains regarding the scale of any future cuts in tax rates and the extent to which they may be accompanied by offsetting measures that will affect the tax base and by changes in various categories of spending. Accordingly, this base case should be viewed as a reasonable starting point that will be updated as the incoming administration's plans take shape.
 
Consumption growth is projected to remain healthy, supported by robust fundamentals, including a strong labour market with gradually rising wages. Business investment is expected to regain momentum as growth in demand remains above growth in potential output. Energy investment is anticipated to support the recovery in capital expenditures, with higher oil prices encouraging a gradual rise in drilling activity. Residential investment is projected to grow at a healthy pace as household incomes rise and construction activity picks up to meet demographic demand. At the same time, the more robust profile for domestic demand is partly offset by a larger drag from net exports associated with a stronger US dollar.
 
Core personal consumption expenditure inflation is expected to gradually increase. At the same time, wage pressures are rising in an economy that is running close to full employment. The recent strength in the US dollar should, however, dampen inflationary pressures.
 
In Japan, third-quarter growth surprised on the upside, and revisions to its national accounts indicate greater momentum than previously assessed. In addition, stronger external demand coming from the United States and a weaker yen should boost output. As a result, Japan's GDP is projected to grow by an average of around 1 per cent over 2016-18, slightly higher than anticipated in the October Report.
 
In the euro area, economic activity and employment growth have held up despite financial system stresses in some countries and elevated political uncertainty, particularly around the consequences of Brexit. Growth over the projection horizon should continue to be modest, tempered by structural factors, including labour market rigidities.
 
The Chinese economy continues to rebalance toward a more sustainable growth path, broadly in line with the expectations set out in the October Report. GDP growth is projected to soften gradually, from 6.6 per cent in 2016 to 6.4 per cent in 2018. Growth of business investment is expected to slow as reforms to state-owned enterprises continue, particularly steps to address overcapacity in some segments of the mining and manufacturing sectors. Residential investment should also be dampened by measures recently introduced by local governments to curb rapid growth in housing sales and prices.
 
In other oil-importing EMEs, growth in both 2016 and 2017 is expected to be slightly lower relative to the October Report. Domestic factors, such as challenges  in implementing structural reforms, as well as capital outflows and tighter financial conditions will restrain economic activity in some countries. This effect will be somewhat offset, however, by weaker currencies, which should boost net exports. Overall, GDP growth is projected to strengthen gradually, from 3.3 per cent in 2016 to 4.4 per cent in 2018. This pickup is expected to be driven primarily by Latin America, supported, in part, by the bottoming-out  of the recession in Brazil.
 
Growth in the rest of the world is expected to accelerate from 1 per cent in 2016 to 3 per cent in 2018. This pickup is mainly due to the anticipated recovery in oil-exporting EMEs, such as Russia and Saudi Arabia, as oil prices stabilize and the adjustment to past oil price declines runs its course.
 
Global crude oil benchmark prices have recently averaged about 15 per cent higher than assumed in the October Report. Part of this increase reflects the agreement between the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and other oil producers to cut output to hasten the rebalancing in the oil market. The Bank still expects a significant drawdown in oil inventories in the second half of 2017, as demand growth is projected to outpace growth in production.
 
By convention, the Bank assumes that oil prices will remain near their recent levels. The per-barrel prices for Brent, West Texas Intermediate and Western Canada Select in US dollars have recently averaged about $55, $50 and $35, respectively, roughly $3 to $7 higher than the October assumption
 
Risks to the Bank's oil price assumption remain tilted to the upside over 2017-18, since prices are still below levels likely required to support medium-term market rebalancing. The scope for sustained higher prices is limited, however, because technological advances have contributed to lower production costs for unconventional oil production, notably shale oil in the United States.
 
There has been significant divergence in the evolution of non-energy commodity prices. Base metal prices have surged, particularly for iron and copper, driven in part by expectations of infrastructure spending in the United States. In contrast, gold prices have fallen, partly in anticipation of tighter US monetary policy.
 
The Canadian economy is evolving largely as expected, but the outlook needs to be viewed in the context of elevated policy uncertainty at the global level. The adjustment of the Canadian economy to past declines in commodity prices is progressing. Activity in resource-related industries appears to have troughed.  At the same time, investment and employment are being reallocated to other sectors of the economy that are expanding, most notably the service sector. The broader effects of the past deterioration of the terms of trade on real incomes and wealth will likely be an ongoing constraint on the growth of economic activity through 2017.
 
Real GDP is expected to grow at a rate moderately above that of potential output throughout the projection horizon. Growth in the service sector in particular will underpin rising employment, household incomes and consumption. A modest expansion of exports and investment will be supported by strengthening foreign demand, although persistent competitiveness challenges are expected to restrain growth in production of non-energy goods. Export growth will be limited by the recent appreciation of the Canadian dollar, alongside that of the US dollar, vis-à-vis most other currencies.
 
Monetary and financial conditions, the strengthening US and global economies and federal fiscal stimulus are expected to support economic activity, despite a modest increase in longer-term borrowing costs since October. Residential investment will be tempered by recent increases in mortgage rates and measures implemented by the federal government in October to mitigate risks to financial stability.
 
While the full range of possible policy changes in the United States has not been incorporated, the outlook does include an initial benchmark assumption about fiscal stimulus that boosts demand for Canadian exports and supports business confidence in Canada. This positive effect is, however, tempered by a deterioration in Canadian competitiveness related to assumed corporate tax cuts in the United States. While prospective protectionist trade measures in the United States would have material consequences for Canadian investment and exports, these measures have not been included in the base case.
 
The output gap is expected to close around mid-2018, similar to the October projection. Total consumer price index inflation is projected to be near 2 per cent through 2017 and 2018 as the offsetting effects of higher consumer energy prices and lower food prices dissipate and economic slack is absorbed. Over the near term, however, total CPI is expected to remain lower than was anticipated in October, mainly reflecting weaker-than-expected food prices.
 
Following a very weak second quarter, largely due to the Alberta wildfires and a sharp decline in non-energy exports, economic growth rebounded strongly. Growth was temporarily boosted by the resumption of production in the oil sands and a partial rebound in non-energy exports. Consumption, especially of services, remained robust, benefiting from the rollout of the Canada Child Benefit.
 
In contrast, residential investment fell in the third quarter for the first time since the beginning of 2014. Government expenditures contracted modestly as public capital formation was less than expected in the third quarter. Business investment remained weak, despite a significant temporary jump associated with the arrival of an imported production module destined for the Hebron offshore oil project.
 
As the temporary factors that spurred activity in the third quarter of 2016 dissipate, growth will moderate to average about 2 per cent over the fourth quarter of 2016 and the first quarter of 2017, underpinned by solid household consumption and fiscal infrastructure spending.  Residential investment, however, is expected to contract further as resale activity is dampened by higher mortgage rates and the recent changes to federal housing finance policies. On balance, growth in business investment and exports of non-energy goods will remain modest.
 
Estimates from the Bank's two measures of economic slack continue to point to material excess capacity.  Similarly, the latest results from the winter Business Outlook Survey indicate that capacity pressures are roughly unchanged from the previous survey.
 
National employment growth has remained firm over the past year, although it has been concentrated in part-time employment. Total hours worked have not risen and, in contrast to the United States, wage pressures continue to be subdued. Overall, the Bank's labour market indicator suggests an increase in slack over the past year.
 
In the context of the ongoing adjustment of the economy, employment outside the energy-intensive provinces (mainly in Ontario, British Columbia and Quebec) has registered solid gains, primarily in service industries. While employment in the energy-intensive provinces has declined over the past year, there are some tentative signs that it is stabilizing.
 
Interprovincial migration has helped the reallocation of resources in the economy. Migration to Alberta has reversed from a net inflow of more than 10,000 persons in the second quarter of 2014 to a net outflow of close to 4,000 persons in the third quarter of 2016. Corresponding flows into Ontario, in particular, have risen sharply.
 
The Bank judges that excess capacity in the economy in the fourth quarter was between 3/4 and 1 3/4 per cent.
 
Total CPI inflation for November, at 1.2 per cent, remained in the bottom half of the Bank's inflation-control range of 1 to 3 per cent. Goods inflation is subdued, largely reflecting low food and consumer energy inflation. Total CPI inflation was somewhat weaker than anticipated because retail food prices declined by about 2 per cent on a year-over-year basis in recent months, their lowest rate since 1992. The weakness in food inflation reflects the past declines in agricultural commodity prices, the waning of exchange rate pass-through and intensified competition in the retail food sector.
 
The Bank now uses three new measures of core inflation to obtain a more reliable gauge of the underlying trend of inflation. These measures have declined since mid-2016 to below 2 per cent, partly reflecting the diminishing effects of exchange rate pass-through. They are broadly consistent with the Bank's assessment of the degree of excess capacity in the Canadian economy.
 
Total CPI inflation is expected to rise from 1.4 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2016 to 1.8 per cent in the first quarter of 2017, as gasoline prices increase on a year-over-year basis. Consumer energy price inflation will rise temporarily in 2017 to reflect higher prices for energy commodities and the impact of the new regulations related to the cap-and-trade plan in Ontario and the carbon levy in Alberta.
 
Overall economic growth is being supported by the expanding service sector while the drag from the commodity price decline on the resource sector dissipates. In particular, activity in resource-related industries is showing signs of bottoming out. The goods sector has started to grow on a year-over-year basis, after two years of near-steady declines.
 
The winter Business Outlook Survey provides further evidence of a bottoming-out  of resource-related activity, with businesses tied to oil now expecting some sales growth following a period of decline. As well, the Bank's more detailed consultations with firms in the energy sector find cautious optimism and modest increases in capital expenditures.
 
Since late 2014, the service sector has been growing at an average annualized rate of near 2 per cent, which can account for all the growth in real GDP. Moreover, exports of services, driven by foreign sales of commercial services and travel services, have outperformed goods exports. This growth in the service sector has fuelled gains in employment, especially in positions that pay above-average wages. Results of the winter Business Outlook Survey suggest that the service sector will continue to experience solid growth.
 
The Bank estimates real GDP growth of 1.3 per cent in 2016 before picking up to around 2 per cent in 2017 and 2018. As in October, household expenditures are projected to be the main contributor to overall growth in 2017, together with sizable additional support from government spending and from exports. The annual contribution from business investment is anticipated to turn positive in 2018.
 
Canadian oil production and exports are expected to expand over the projection horizon, although the declines in energy sector investment in recent years will restrain their growth. Increases in non-energy commodity exports are also expected to be modest, given persistent competitiveness challenges that will dampen production and investment in the sector. The recent appreciation of the Canadian dollar against the currencies of some key competitors is projected to weigh on Canadian export growth.
 
In recent years, non-commodity exports have not been as strong as expected. Consequently, the Bank updated its framework to better account for the evolving nature of foreign demand and structural factors, including competitiveness challenges.
 
Taking into account both the new assessment of foreign demand, which is expected to grow modestly in the coming years, and the improved measures of structural and other competitiveness challenges, total exports are expected to increase by about 3 per cent on average over the projection horizon. This forecast for exports is similar to that in the October base-case projection, which already incorporated judgment based on a preliminary version of the revised framework.
 
The base-case projection assumes that foreign demand will be boosted by US fiscal stimulus. The positive impact is, however, dampened by the decline in Canadian competiveness associated with assumed corporate tax cuts in the United States. Consequently, the projected export profile incorporates a modest downward adjustment to reflect this possibility; this initial assumption will be revised once concrete policy measures are announced and enacted. The base case does not include any protectionist measures that may be adopted by the incoming US administration.
 
Investment in the service sector has underpinned total business investment in recent years. While service sector investment was slow to recover from the financial crisis, surpassing its 2007 level only in 2015, it has been more resilient than investment in goods-producing industries. Looking ahead, service sector investment should continue to increase. In particular, the winter Business Outlook Survey indicates that intentions to invest in machinery and equipment remain widespread among service sector firms.
 
The recent rebound in the number of new drilling rigs and an analysis of the capital expenditure plans of oil and gas firms point to a modest increase in the level of investment in the energy sector beginning in early 2017.
 
The persistent weakness in overall business investment raises the issue of whether structural factors, such as declining labour force growth, weaker total factor productivity growth and regulatory obstacles, might be playing a greater role than previously assumed. Furthermore, the ongoing shift in the economy toward the production of services could result not only in a different composition of investment but also in a lower share of investment in GDP.
 
In addition, the current high level of uncertainty could be having a greater restraining effect on business investment than previously assessed. While firms surveyed by the Bank continue to cite insufficient domestic demand as the main reason for holding back investment, some also cite uncertainty as an obstacle. As well, a number of exporters have indicated that a challenging competitive environment has encouraged them to maintain or build a foreign presence to help meet foreign demand. Future US policies could also incite firms to invest in the United States rather than in Canada.
 
Since the US fiscal stimulus currently being assumed would include a reduction in personal and corporate tax rates, the competitiveness of Canadian firms could be adversely affected. Consequently, to reflect this possibility, the projected Canadian investment profile incorporates a downward adjustment. This initial assumption will be revised once concrete policy measures are announced and enacted by the incoming US administration.
 
The Bank anticipates continued solid consumption, supported by accommodative monetary policy and higher federal government transfers, despite weakness in the energy-intensive provinces associated with the impact of the past decline in the terms of trade.
 
In contrast, residential investment is expected to decline further in the coming quarters, making little contribution to overall GDP growth over the projection horizon. As a result, the share of residential investment in the Canadian economy should gradually ease toward a level closer to historical experience.
 
Mortgage interest rates have increased since October, mainly reflecting higher funding costs.  As in October, the Bank estimates that the impact of the federal government's tighter housing-related measures will subtract 0.3 per cent from the level of real GDP by the end of 2018.
 
Over the 2017-18 projection horizon, total CPI inflation is expected to be close to 2 per cent. The inflationary effect of exchange rate pass-through is expected to have largely dissipated by early 2017. There will be upward pressures on consumer energy prices during 2017, stemming from the impact of higher commodity prices and the new regulations related to carbon use. This upward pressure is more than offset by the disinflationary effect of food prices and excess capacity through most of the year. By around mid-2018, inflation is expected to be sustainably at the target as excess capacity in the economy dissipates.
 
Inflation expectations remain well anchored. The January 2017 Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation was 1.5 per cent in 2016 and 2.0 per cent in both 2017 and 2018. Similarly, results from the winter Business Outlook Survey indicate that firms' expectations for inflation over the next two years remain within the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range.
 
Based on the past dispersion of private sector forecasts, a reasonable range around the base-case projection for total CPI inflation is ±0.3 percentage points. This range is intended to convey a sense of forecast uncertainty.
 
The outlook for inflation is subject to several upside and downside risks emanating from both the external environment and the domestic economy. Overall, the Bank assesses that the risks to the projected path for inflation are roughly balanced, given what is known today. However, the outlook is subject to considerable economic and geopolitical uncertainty, including that surrounding the policies of the incoming administration in the United States. As in past reports, the focus is on a selection of risks identified as the most important for the projected path for inflation, drawing from a larger set of risks taken into account in the projection.
 
The evolution of the risks since the previous Report is summarized in Table 4. Most of the risks remain relevant. The risk of a broad-based slowdown in EMEs is now captured under two new risks: a notable shift toward protectionist global trade policies and higher global long-term interest rates. The risk of higher oil prices has been expanded to include a broader set of commodities.
 
While the base case incorporates some strengthening of US economic growth, resulting in part from anticipated fiscal stimulus, a distinctly stronger growth path is also possible. The ongoing recovery, together with actual and anticipated policy changes, could trigger "animal spirits" - that is, boost business confidence and lead to an acceleration in the rate of investment, firm creation and innovation. Productivity in the United States may rise by more than expected if the persistent weakness in growth includes a larger-than-estimated cyclical element, and more discouraged workers may be drawn back into the workforce. Additional infrastructure spending, deregulation and tax cuts could further strengthen demand and potential output in the long run. Stronger US household spending and public and private investment would have positive spillovers for Canadian exports.
 
While the precise trade policy measures to be taken by the incoming US administration remain to be determined, the protectionist tilt is already evident. More-negative effects are possible if US measures are material, especially if they prompt protectionist responses from other economies. Beyond the direct effects on Canadian exports and business investment, such policies could weigh on the global economy by dampening global trade and economic growth. The resulting weaker-than-expected foreign demand would be an additional drag on Canadian exports and business investment. In a more adverse scenario, the process of globalization - and notably the development of global value chains, which has underpinned world growth in recent decades - could go into reverse. In such a scenario, additional pervasive negative effects on productivity and potential growth are possible, in Canada and globally.
 
Risks to commodity prices remain tilted to the upside. If realized, these risks would improve Canada's terms of trade, wealth and household spending. Prices of base metals, particularly iron and copper, could rise further if infrastructure spending in the United States is greater than markets anticipate. There is also some upside risk to oil prices, notwithstanding the price gains seen late in 2016. Oil-related capital expenditures have sunk globally over the past two years, raising the risk that future oil supply could be inadequate to meet demand. The degree of upside risk to prices will depend on a number of uncertain factors, notably ongoing efficiency gains in production at unconventional sources.
 
The disappointing performance of business investment to date could reflect more-sustained structural factors. Over time, weaker business investment would also reduce capital deepening and lower potential output, partially mitigating the disinflationary effect of weaker demand.
 
Given the high level of household indebtedness, households may also become more prudent, restraining consumption and housing expenditures. Moreover, while recent federal policy changes related to housing finance are meant to mitigate the vulnerability associated with highly indebted households over time, their adverse near-term impact on residential investment could be larger than anticipated. Outsized negative effects could occur if the policies were to have a pronounced effect on house prices in major centres. Weaker-than-expected household spending would have a direct negative impact on real GDP.
 
The recent rise in global bond yields reflects increased optimism for growth, inflation and policy rates, partly driven by the expected fiscal expansion in the United States. Yet term premiums remain compressed by historical standards. While the base case assumes term premiums return gradually to normal, there is a possibility of a sharp increase. If this were to occur, the upward pressure on bond yields could increase capital outflows from EMEs, and financial conditions could tighten further. These developments could translate into a decline in activity in sectors sensitive to interest rates, a rise in debt-service burdens, and weaker global and Canadian growth.