The global economy has suffered an intense, synchronous recession and considerable excess supply has opened up. There are now increasing signs that economic activity has begun to expand in many countries in response to monetary and fiscal policy stimulus and measures to stabilize the global financial system. However, the recovery is nascent. Effective and resolute policy implementation remains critical to sustained global growth.
 
The dynamics of the recovery in Canada remain broadly consistent with the Bank's medium-term outlook in its April Monetary Policy Report. Stimulative monetary and fiscal policies, improved financial conditions, firmer commodity prices, and a rebound in business and consumer confidence are spurring domestic demand growth. However, the higher Canadian dollar, as well as ongoing restructuring in key industrial sectors, is significantly moderating the pace of overall growth.
 
Some of the early strength in domestic demand represents a bringing forward of household expenditures, which modestly alters the profile of growth over the projection period relative to the April Report. The Bank projects that the economy will contract by 2.3 per cent in 2009 and then grow by 3.0 per cent in 2010 and 3.5 per cent in 2011, reaching production capacity in the middle of 2011.
 
Total CPI inflation declined to -0.3 per cent in June and should trough in the third quarter of this year before returning to the 2 per cent target in the second quarter of 2011 as aggregate supply and demand return to balance. Core inflation held up at 1.9 per cent in the second quarter of 2009. The Bank still expects core inflation to diminish in the second half of this year before gradually returning to 2 per cent in the second quarter of 2011.
 
Although the vigorous policy actions taken by monetary and fiscal authorities around the world appear to have reduced the probability of an extreme negative outcome for the global economy, significant upside and downside risks remain to the inflation projection for Canada.
 
The main upside risks to inflation relate to domestic factors, and the possibility that economic momentum will be stronger and more sustained than currently anticipated. Another upside risk to inflation is the possibility that potential output will be lower than the Bank's revised estimate, if the extensive restructuring in certain sectors is more protracted and the investment response is more delayed than currently envisaged.
 
The principal downside risks to inflation relate mainly to the external sector. The restoration of normal financial conditions could be more gradual than expected, and further setbacks cannot be precluded. Such developments could have serious spillover effects in Canada through trade, financial, and confidence channels. Importantly, a stronger and more volatile Canadian dollar could act as a significant drag on growth and put additional downward pressure on inflation.
 
While the underlying macroeconomic risks to the projection are roughly balanced, the Bank judges that, as a consequence of operating at the effective lower bound, the overall risks to its inflation projection are tilted slightly to the downside.
 
On 4 June and 21 July, the Bank reaffirmed its conditional commitment to maintain its target for the overnight rate at the effective lower bound of 1/4 per cent until the end of the second quarter of 2010 in order to achieve the inflation target.
 
The Bank retains considerable flexibility in the conduct of monetary policy at low interest rates, consistent with the framework outlined in the April Report.
 
The synchronous global recession that began in the last quarter of 2008 deepened in the first quarter of 2009, with a greater contraction in global demand than had been expected at the time of the April Monetary Policy Report. The recession continued into the second quarter of 2009, but the pace of decline in output appears to have decelerated, suggesting that global economic activity is near its trough. Vigorous policy actions across the G-20 have helped to stabilize financial markets, reduce uncertainty, and support aggregate demand. Global equity markets have rebounded after sharp declines in 2008 and early 2009, credit spreads in key markets have narrowed, and banks have been able to raise needed capital.
 
Fragility in the global economy persists, nevertheless. Financial deleveraging by banks, households, and firms is continuing, mirrored by ongoing adjustments on the real side of the economy. Inventories, employment, and capital are adjusting to lower global demand and have contributed to a substantial reduction in real GDP growth in the major economies. While sluggish demand and more-negative output gaps have led to declines in global inflation rates, structural adjustments in the global economy have reduced the growth of potential output and, together with price and wage rigidities, have dampened the downward pressure on inflation.
 
Vigorous fiscal and monetary policy measures, coupled with continuing support to the financial sector, have helped to restore consumer and business confidence and to improve financial market conditions in most economies. Effective and resolute policy implementation remains critical to a sustained economic recovery.
 
In the United States, economic activity continued to decline in the first half of 2009, albeit at a slowing pace. Sales of motor vehicles were sharply lower than in the previous year, and ongoing restructuring in the North American auto sector suggests that total production for 2009 will be at its lowest level in over 30 years. Construction activity in the United States has remained weak, and house prices have fallen further. However, home sales have stabilized and inventories of unsold new houses have declined, indicating that the contraction in residential investment may be coming to an end. In addition, transfers and tax cuts boosted disposable income in the second quarter, the rate of deterioration in the labour market slowed somewhat, and forward-looking indicators, such as new orders and consumer sentiment, suggest that the US economy is at its trough.
 
In Europe, economic activity in the first half of 2009 was weaker than expected, owing to sharp declines in investment and net exports and an ongoing inventory correction. Firms cut back on production and investment in response to a deteriorating external environment, an appreciating currency, and slumping domestic demand. Unemployment has risen, even as rigidities have slowed adjustment in the labour market. Uncertainty about the state of the banking sector remains high, with concerns that the recently announced stress tests for European banks could uncover additional capital shortfalls associated with the severe economic downturn and exposure to Eastern Europe. In Japan, following an unexpectedly sharp downturn in the first quarter, economic indicators for the second quarter have been more favourable. A rapid inventory correction and announcements of additional fiscal stimulus have supported Japanese consumer and business confidence. In China, economic activity has been much stronger than in other Asian economies, with aggressive infrastructure spending and consumer support policies boosting domestic demand and helping to offset falling exports.
 
Commodity prices have firmed since the April Report. Energy prices have risen in response to large production cuts from OPEC, lower inventories, and expectations of higher energy demand, notably from Asia. The futures curve continues to suggest higher oil prices in the period ahead. While the rise in non-energy commodity prices has been less pronounced, metals prices have increased substantially, owing mainly to rising demand from China.
 
Reduced uncertainty about the global economic outlook, together with ongoing support to the financial sector, led to marked improvements in the global financial system in the second quarter of 2009. As the probability of a more extreme negative outcome for the world economy diminished, global equity markets rebounded and started pricing in a more positive outlook. Conditions in corporate bond markets have begun to improve in many countries, with narrowing risk premiums on corporate bonds and rising corporate bond issuance. The completion of the stress tests for major US banks has helped to restore confidence in financial institutions, contributing to lower spreads in the interbank market.
 
While these signs of stabilizing financial conditions are encouraging, many of the improvements are linked to government interventions. The markets for securitized instruments remain severely impaired, and access to credit has continued to tighten for households and businesses in many countries, as indicated by surveys of senior loan officers.
 
Overall, however, recent developments suggest that global financial markets are in the process of healing, as the severe distress that characterized markets after the collapse of Lehman Brothers last September dissipates. Progress in restoring the functioning of financial markets nevertheless remains uneven. Additional improvements necessary for a sustained economic recovery are expected to be gradual, and are contingent on banks continuing to repair their balance sheets - particularly in the United States and Europe.
 
The outlook for growth in the major advanced countries in 2009 and 2010 remains broadly unchanged from the April Report, but the risk of a sustained economic decline has diminished considerably. The Bank now expects the global economy to shrink by 1.7 per cent in 2009, followed by growth of 2.3 per cent in 2010 and 3.9 per cent in 2011.
 
This gradual recovery of the global economy is underpinned by several critical factors. First, extensive support to the financial sector, together with reduced uncertainty about the macroeconomic outlook, should contribute to a further normalization of financial markets, resulting in lower borrowing costs and increased availability of credit to businesses and households. Second, the aggressive fiscal and monetary stimulus already in place should help to restore consumer and business confidence, and raise domestic demand. Third, once corrections in the housing sectors of several economies are complete, a significant drag on growth will be removed. Fourth, completion of the inventory cycle, most notably in the auto and IT sectors, together with a resumption of cross-border trade flows, should support the global recovery. However, structural adjustments - most significantly in the auto sector - are expected to progress slowly, and rising unemployment and negative wealth effects will restrain consumption and investment. The protracted nature of the recovery will add to excess production capacity in the global economy, holding down wage and price inflation.
 
In the United States, economic growth is expected to remain below potential in 2009 and 2010, causing unemployment to continue to rise. Fiscal policy is expected to provide important stimulus to the economy, supporting a gradual recovery in final domestic demand. Motor vehicle production and housing starts should also rise once inventories have adjusted, since current levels are not sufficient to cover projected replacement rates. These developments should increase the demand for Canadian exports. The recovery will nevertheless be gradual, since lower disposable income and the need to increase savings to rebuild household balance sheets will continue to put downward pressure on consumption through 2009 and 2010. Annual US GDP is projected to decline by 2.4 per cent in 2009, and to grow by 1.4 per cent in 2010 and by 3.4 per cent in 2011.
 
The timing and speed of the recovery in other industrialized economies reflect past and current policy actions, as well as the state of their banking systems. In Europe, the recovery is likely to be more protracted than in the United States, reflecting the less-aggressive actions taken so far by European policy-makers, as well as ongoing difficulties in the banking system. Europe should nevertheless benefit from strengthening global growth, which would stimulate economic activity through trade, financial, and confidence linkages. In Japan, inventory adjustments have been unexpectedly rapid, suggesting that the inventory cycle will exert less drag on output in the near term. Newly announced fiscal stimulus and continuing support from monetary policy should boost domestic demand, helping to offset the weak external environment.
 
Economic growth in China is expected to strengthen as fiscal and monetary stimulus increase domestic demand and help reduce the country's reliance on exports. In other emerging-market economies, economic conditions were very weak in the first half of 2009, but are projected to recover gradually over 2009 and 2010, contributing to higher global demand and providing further support for commodity prices over the medium term.
 
At the time of the April Report, the Bank projected that the recession in Canada would deepen further and that a muted recovery would start in the fourth quarter of 2009. Factors underpinning the projected recovery included monetary and fiscal stimulus, improvements in global financial conditions and confidence, the beginning of the recovery in the global economy, and a strengthening in the terms of trade. Recent events have been broadly in line with this profile. However, with the economy supported by better financial conditions and higher levels of business and consumer confidence than anticipated, the downturn in activity in the first half of the year has been less severe, and growth is now projected to turn positive in the third quarter. In part, this earlier pickup in GDP growth represents a bringing forward of household expenditures relative to the Bank's previous projections, which modestly alters the profile of growth over the projection period. Aside from these timing considerations, the outlook for the Canadian economy is broadly consistent with that presented in April.
 
Canada's recession intensified in the first quarter of 2009, in line with the sharp downturn in the global economy. Real GDP fell by 5.4 per cent (at annual rates), the largest quarterly drop since 1991, and real gross domestic income continued to fall sharply, owing to a further deterioration in the terms of trade. The first-quarter decline in real GDP was less than had been anticipated in the April Report, reflecting a smaller-than-expected reduction in household spending and weaker imports.
 
With the exception of government spending, all the major components of aggregate demand fell in the first quarter. The decline in exports intensified, reflecting the steep drop in US demand and low commodity prices. While the weakness in exports was quite generalized, exports of automotive products were particularly hard hit, plunging by about 80 per cent (at annual rates) as a result of depressed motor vehicle sales in the United States and the major restructuring under way in the North American auto industry. Final domestic demand also fell markedly for a second consecutive quarter, as households and firms curtailed spending in response to the decline in domestic income and the high level of uncertainty. While inventories across all sectors were drawn down in the first quarter, the sharp drop in sales led to a further increase in the stock-to-sales ratio, particularly in the manufacturing and wholesale sectors.
 
The Canadian economy continued to contract in the second quarter of 2009, although the pace of decline appears to have moderated. Consumer spending likely picked up, aided by the rebound in confidence and equity prices, resilient wage growth, and an improvement in the terms of trade. The growth of consumption should nevertheless remain well below trend in the second quarter, owing partly to the past erosion of household wealth and rising unemployment. The housing sector appears to be reviving, as suggested by the sharp rebound in the resale market, reflecting improvements in consumer confidence and affordability.
 
Foreign demand for Canadian goods and services remained very weak in the second quarter, however. Although the decline in exports appears to have slowed, Canadian exporters continue to face a challenging environment, with the weakness in US demand, the recent appreciation of the Canadian dollar, and ongoing restructuring in the automotive and forest products sectors. Business investment also appears to have fallen further, reflecting uncertainty about the timing and strength of the global recovery and deteriorating cash flows. In addition, firms face ongoing pressure to reduce inventories further in response to exceptionally high stock-to-sales ratios.
 
In the April Report, the Bank revised down its estimate of potential output over the 2009-11 period in light of the important structural changes under way in the Canadian economy and the sizable drop in investment. As a result, the growth of potential output is expected to slow to 1.1 per cent in 2009 and then pick up gradually to 1.5 per cent in 2010 and to 1.9 per cent in 2011.
 
Excess supply in the Canadian economy increased substantially as the recession deepened. The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap reached -4.3 per cent in the second quarter of 2009. In assessing excess capacity, the Bank considers the conventional measure in conjunction with several other indicators, particularly since this measure tends to have a higher margin of error around turning points. The Bank's summer Business Outlook Survey reports that the percentage of firms that would have difficulty meeting an unanticipated increase in demand remains at an exceptionally low level.
 
Most labour market indicators mirror the weakness in product markets. The economy has continued to shed jobs (albeit at a slowing rate), average hours worked have fallen, and the unemployment rate has risen to its highest level in 11 years. The percentage of firms reporting labour shortages in the Bank's summer survey increased only slightly, after reaching its lowest level in 10 years in the spring survey.
 
After reviewing all the indicators of capacity pressures and taking into account the weakness in potential output associated with the ongoing restructuring in the Canadian economy, the Bank judges that the economy was operating about 3.5 per cent below its production capacity in the second quarter of 2009.
 
As expected, total CPI inflation fell sharply in the second quarter. The 12-month rate of change in total CPI declined from 1.2 per cent in March to -0.3 per cent in June, reflecting the large year-on-year drop in energy prices. This decline in total CPI inflation was smaller than anticipated in the April Report, however, since core inflation remained roughly unchanged at 1.9 per cent. This stickiness in core inflation, despite the widening output gap, was associated with resilient wage growth relative to the underlying trend in productivity. It may also point to a sluggish response of inflation to excess supply. Nonetheless, the substantial excess supply in the economy is expected to result in lower core inflation over the next few quarters.
 
Measures of near-term inflation expectations have risen somewhat from very low levels in recent months, reflecting increases in commodity prices as well as improved market sentiment and consumer confidence. The latest Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation is 0.4 per cent for 2009. The forecasts for 2010 and beyond remain close to the 2 per cent inflation target. The Bank's most recent Business Outlook Survey also showed inflation expectations increasingly concentrated within the Bank's inflation-control range.
 
Financial conditions in Canada have improved since the April Report, in line with recent global developments. Equities have rebounded, spreads on Canadian corporate bonds have declined significantly, and corporate bond issuance has picked up. Financial conditions in Canada continue to be more favourable than in other advanced economies, as has been the case throughout the financial crisis.
 
Funding costs for Canadian banks remain low. Borrowing costs for households are also low, although they have recently increased modestly as a result of rising rates on longer-term fixed mortgages. In contrast, borrowing costs for Canadian businesses have continued to fall in recent months, with firms benefiting from the recent sharp reduction in spreads.  The effective average interest rate on business borrowing has declined by about 65 basis points since the April Report, despite somewhat higher yields on government bonds. However, respondents in the Bank's latest Senior Loan officer Survey and Business Outlook Survey reported that the pricing and availability of business credit tightened further in the second quarter.  Nonetheless, the tightening was less generalized and more industry-specific than in previous quarters. Overall, low borrowing costs for households and falling borrowing costs for businesses should help to revive interest-sensitive spending and support the economic recovery.
 
One indication of the improvement in Canadian financial conditions is the significant increase in the Bank's financial conditions index since April. Indeed, the level of the FCI is now slightly above its 10-year average. The index reflects the exceptionally low level of the policy rate, which is offsetting higher-than-normal spreads on corporate bonds and tightening in lending standards.
 
Household credit continues to grow at a pace near its average since 1992 and has picked up in recent months. This strength seems to be linked to an increased demand for mortgage credit, related to the recent rebound in the resale housing market. Business credit, in contrast, has been much weaker, recording no growth overall in the three months to May, reflecting the weak outlook for business investment, the drawdown in inventories, and tight credit conditions. There was some shift towards market sources of credit, in line with the recent stabilization of financial markets.
 
Monetary aggregates have continued to grow strongly, despite declining nominal GDP growth. In the three months to May, the narrow aggregate M1+ grew at an annual rate of 14.4 per cent, while M2++ grew by 7.6 per cent. It is difficult to draw the implications of monetary expansion for economic activity, since the demand for money is likely to be abnormally high and more variable in an environment of very low interest rates and tight credit conditions. It is encouraging, however, that money supply has increased to meet higher demand. The previous portfolio shifts into more-liquid assets should begin to reverse with an improving economic outlook and the normalization of credit conditions.
 
The Canadian dollar has strengthened since the April Report, trading in a range of roughly 81 to 92 cents US and averaging about 87 cents US. The appreciation of the Canadian dollar reflects two broad developments. The first is rising commodity prices, which have caused similar appreciations of other commodity currencies since April. Second is the generalized weakening of the US dollar against all major currencies in the second quarter of 2009.
 
Canadian monetary and fiscal policies have eased considerably since the onset of the economic downturn. In April 2009, the Bank of Canada lowered its target for the overnight interest rate to 1/4 per cent - the effective lower bound for this target rate - and made a commitment, conditional on the inflation outlook, to keep the policy interest rate at that level until the end of the second quarter of 2010. The Bank also explained the principles that would guide any action to provide further monetary stimulus, if needed, at the effective lower bound. On 4 June and 21 July, the Bank maintained the target overnight rate at 1/4 per cent and reaffirmed its conditional commitment to hold the policy rate at that level until the end of the second quarter of 2010.
 
The Bank's base-case projection incorporates the following key assumptions: a Canada/US exchange rate averaging 87 cents US; energy prices in line with recent futures prices; prices for non-energy commodities increasing progressively as the global economy recovers; and global credit conditions remaining tight through early 2010, before improving gradually.
 
The Bank's base-case projection now sees growth in the Canadian economy resuming in the third quarter of 2009, one quarter earlier than anticipated in the April Report. This somewhat more favourable short-term outlook reflects a more modest retrenchment in household and business spending, as negative effects on confidence dissipate, financial market conditions improve, and the terms of trade increase more quickly than previously anticipated. The medium-term outlook for growth is broadly consistent with that in the April Report. However, growth is projected to be stronger through to mid-2010 and then weaker over the rest of the projection horizon.
 
On an annual average basis, the economy is projected to contract by 2.3 per cent this year, and to grow by 3.0 per cent in 2010 and by 3.5 per cent in 2011.
 
Despite the upward revision to their spending profile in 2009 and 2010, households are expected to remain cautious in light of the continued weakness in labour markets and the erosion in household wealth from past declines in equity and house prices. As a result, the personal savings rate is expected to remain elevated over the projection horizon, at or above its average since the mid-1990s. This adjustment returns the share of consumer spending in nominal GDP to its long-run average. This share has been relatively stable in Canada, in contrast to the situation in the United States, where it has risen substantially. The stimulus coming from monetary and fiscal policies should help to support household spending over the projection horizon.
 
Business fixed investment is expected to contract sharply in 2009, reflecting the ongoing and substantial drop in corporate profits, tight credit conditions, the high level of uncertainty, and excess production capacity. Firms are also expected to draw down their inventories, and this is projected to subtract significantly from GDP growth in 2009. The improvement in financial conditions and economic activity, as well as higher commodity prices, should help boost business spending in 2010.
 
Export volumes are expected to recover over the projection period in response to the improvement in external demand - partly reflecting a pickup in motor vehicle production in North America (from the very low levels in 2009) and a rebound in US housing activity - as well as higher commodity prices. Canadian exporters will benefit disproportionately from the US recovery in 2010-11, since the projected growth in the Bank's US activity index is higher than the expected growth in US real GDP over this period. Import volumes are also projected to pick up, starting in the second half of 2009, in line with the anticipated economic recovery and the recent appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
 
As economic activity begins to improve, excess supply will gradually be absorbed, and the economy is expected to reach production capacity in the middle of 2011.
 
Core inflation is expected to decline to a trough of 1.4 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2009, reflecting the significant excess supply in the Canadian economy and a continued deceleration in food prices. This is higher than expected in the April Report, owing mainly to the smaller output gap. With excess supply being absorbed gradually, and with inflation expectations well anchored, core inflation is projected to return to 2 per cent in the second quarter of 2011.
 
Total CPI inflation is expected to continue to fall in the third quarter of 2009, reaching a trough of -0.7 per cent, before returning to the Bank's 2 per cent target in the second quarter of 2011.
 
The uncertainty around the Bank's inflation projection is illustrated using fan charts. Chart 21 and Chart 22 show the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core and total CPI inflation from the third quarter of 2009 to the end of 2011  they show, in particular, the slight downward tilt to the confidence bands that results from monetary policy operating at the effective lower bound.
 
Although the vigorous policy actions taken by monetary and fiscal authorities around the world appear to have reduced the probability of an extreme negative outcome for the global economy, and recent developments provide encouraging signs of a potential upturn in global and Canadian economic activity, significant upside and downside risks remain to the Bank's inflation projection for Canada.
 
The main upside risks to inflation relate to domestic factors, and the possibility that the momentum in economic activity will be stronger and more sustained than currently anticipated. While the Bank's latest base-case projection already incorporates a somewhat faster pickup in domestic demand than had been expected in the April Report, the recent rebound in consumer confidence, coupled with improvements in financial conditions, could lead to less precautionary saving, stronger growth, and an earlier return to the 2 per cent inflation target. Another upside risk to inflation is the possibility that potential output will be lower than the Bank's revised estimate, if the extensive restructuring in certain sectors is more protracted and the investment response more delayed than currently envisaged.
 
The principal downside risks to inflation relate mainly to the external sector. The restoration of normal financial conditions could be more gradual than expected and further setbacks cannot be precluded-triggered, for example, by unexpected losses at financial institutions or by escalating concerns about current account and budgetary imbalances. Such developments could have serious spillover effects in Canada through trade, financial, and confidence channels. Importantly, a stronger and more volatile Canadian dollar could act as a significant drag on growth and put additional downward pressure on inflation.
 
While the underlying macroeconomic risks to the projection are roughly balanced, the Bank judges that, as a consequence of operating at the effective lower bound, the overall risks to its inflation projection are tilted slightly to the downside.