The global economy has been unfolding largely as expected, and prospects for continued robust growth are quite favourable, especially over the near term. Against this backdrop, the outlook for the Canadian economy through to the end of 2006 is essentially unchanged from that in the January Monetary Policy Report Update.
 
The Canadian economy continues to adjust to major global developments. These include the realignment of currencies in response to global imbalances, the higher prices of both energy and non-energy commodities, and growing competition from emerging-market economies.
 
The sectoral adjustments to these developments are becoming more evident. Many Canadian commodity-producing sectors are expanding. However, firms in a number of other sectors exposed to international trade are facing pressure from the appreciation of the Canadian dollar and from foreign competition. On balance, net exports have been a drag on the economy. But with robust domestic demand, some sectors - such as retail, wholesale, and housing - have been growing strongly. Canadian monetary policy continues to facilitate the adjustment process by aiming to keep inflation at the 2 per cent target and the economy operating near its production capacity. The Bank continues to judge that the economy is operating slightly below its full production capacity.
 
After appreciating sharply in 2003 and 2004, the Canadian dollar has been fluctuating in a range of around 80 to 83 cents US since the beginning of the year.
 
The Bank's base-case projection calls for annualized growth of about 2.5 per cent in the first half of 2005 and 3 per cent in the second half. Growth of about 3.5 per cent is expected over the four quarters of 2006, consistent with returning the economy to full production capacity in the second half of that year.
 
Expressed on an annual average basis, growth in 2005 is projected to be about 2.5 per cent, down slightly from the January Update, while the projection for 2006 is little changed at about 3.25 per cent.
 
We continue to expect core inflation to move back to the 2 per cent target around the end of 2006. Based on the scenario implied by oil-price futures, total CPI inflation is projected to remain slightly above 2 per cent this year and to move slightly below 2 per cent in the second half of 2006.
 
Growth in the Canadian economy this year and next is anticipated to come primarily from domestic demand, as net exports are expected to exert a drag on the economy. To continue to support aggregate demand, the Bank decided to leave the target for the overnight rate unchanged at 2.5 per cent on 1 March and 12 April. In line with the Bank's outlook, a reduction of monetary stimulus will be required over time.
 
The global and Canadian economic outlooks remain subject to both upside and downside risks and to uncertainties. These risks include the pace of expansion in Asia, and the prices of oil and non-energy commodities. A further risk relates to the resolution of current account imbalances, with the risk of a disorderly correction growing over time, should these imbalances persist.
 
Most of the uncertainties with respect to the Canadian outlook continue to relate to how the economy is adjusting to the relative price changes associated with major global developments.
 
In the past year, core CPI inflation has been relatively stable, fluctuating in a range of 1.5 to 1.8 per cent. The surge in crude oil prices since the end of 2003 has pushed the average rate of increase in the total CPI to slightly more than 2 per cent over the same period.
 
The core rate of inflation moved up to 1.8 per cent in February from 1.5 per cent in August 2004, still below the Bank's 2 per cent inflation-control target. This is virtually the same as the rise projected in the January Update. Other measures of the trend rate of inflation that the Bank follows also remained below the 2 per cent target.
 
The modest amount of excess supply in the Canadian economy through much of 2003 and 2004 contributed to keeping the core rate slightly below longer-run expectations. Further reductions in the prices of many import-intensive goods, caused by the appreciation of the Canadian dollar and ongoing decreases in the global prices of some consumer goods, also continued to put downward pressure on core inflation over the period. The rate of increase in homeowners' replacement costs, an important component of core prices for shelter, has also eased somewhat since July 2004 as a result of lower year-over-year increases in the prices of new housing. Fluctuations in car prices, reflecting changes in manufacturers' incentives programs, explain much of the short-term variation in core inflation observed since mid-2004.
 
Since last August, the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was, on average, just above 2 per cent. The higher rate of increase relative to the core rate chiefly reflected the impact of substantial increases in the prices of energy commodities on selected CPI components. In particular, in February there were substantial increases in consumer prices for gasoline, fuel oil, natural gas, and intercity transportation from year-earlier levels.
 
Canada's real GDP grew at an annual rate of 2.9 per cent in the third quarter of 2004, as expected in the October Report. In the fourth quarter, economic growth eased to an annual rate of 1.7 per cent. This was less than anticipated in both the last Report and the January Update. For the second half of the year as a whole, exports were markedly weaker than projected, although this was partly offset by unexpectedly large inventory investment. Economic growth is likely to be on the order of 2.5 per cent in the first quarter of 2005.
 
Final domestic demand continued to rise substantially in the second half of 2004, and inventory investment rose markedly in response to this robust growth and to concerns about delivery lags. In contrast, the volume of net exports fell back.
 
Canadian exports decreased sharply in the second half of 2004. Although a good part of this decline reflected an unwinding of the surprising surge recorded in the first half, it more fundamentally represented the ongoing adjustment to the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar. That adjustment has been most evident in those export components characterized by product differentiation. Indeed, in the second half of last year, export volumes of machinery and equipment and non-automotive consumer goods relative to indicators of foreign activity resumed the steep decline that began in 2003. In contrast, exports of commodities relative to US industrial production, while fluctuating over the course of 2004, were little changed at year-end from 2003 levels. Exports of automotive products were also little changed over the course of last year relative to US indicators of activity for the motor vehicle sector.
 
Among the components of final domestic demand, the pace of business investment picked up markedly towards year-end. Household spending also rose considerably, owing to monetary stimulus and ongoing gains in real incomes.
 
Part of the increase in final domestic demand was met by substantial gains in imports. The rise in inventory investment also contributed to boost imports. Some of the marked rise in import volumes relative to indicators of domestic activity, especially for such items as machinery and equipment and crude and fabricated materials, reflected the impact of the higher Canadian dollar, as well as growing competition from low-cost emerging markets.
 
The Canadian economy is continuing to adjust to major global developments. These include a marked realignment of world currencies, including the Canadian dollar; high price levels for crude oil and non-energy commodities; and the growing global economic impact of China and India. Since the October Report, there have been more indications of the sectoral effects of these global developments and of firms' responses to these changes.
 
The strong global economic expansion boosted profitability for most of the industries with high exposure to international trade in the first three quarters of 2004. In the fourth quarter of last year, however, profitability eased off in many of these industries, following a reduction in the global demand for Canadian products and a further appreciation of the Canadian dollar from the middle of 2004. As a result, there was only marginal growth in the overall level of activity in sectors highly exposed to international competition from August 2004 to January 2005. In contrast, most sectors with a low exposure to foreign competition - such as housing, retail and wholesale trade, and finance, insurance and real estate - made further solid gains in output. Some of these sectors also benefited from lower costs for imported products.
 
These global economic developments can be expected to lead to important shifts in the composition of activity among the broad sectors of the Canadian economy. One important channel through which this takes place is major shifts in capital spending at the sectoral level in response to expected persistent changes in profitability.
 
Consistent with this, the largest cumulative gains in actual and planned capital spending for 2004 and 2005 occurred in commodity-producing industries in response to the substantial rebound in global commodity prices and the expectation that these price gains would persist for some time. Increases in investment expenditures are particularly pronounced in oil and natural gas extraction, other mining activity, and in the manufacture of wood products. The substantial gains in Canada's final domestic demand in recent years have also led to a marked rise in capital spending in many sectors with a low exposure to international trade, especially electric power generation, finance and insurance, information and cultural industries, and the manufacture of refined petroleum products. Moreover, in many of the sectors either producing commodities or with a low exposure to international trade, a large part of the increase in capital spending is directed at expanding capacity.
 
In contrast, there is likely to be prolonged downward pressure on profitability in many industries highly exposed to international competition (other than those producing energy and other commodities), primarily because of the Canadian dollar's appreciation and growing competition from such economies as China and India. As a result, investment spending in these industries seems to be directed at reducing costs and improving competitiveness rather than at increasing capacity.
 
More broadly, the Bank's Business Outlook Surveys have shown that many firms adversely affected by global developments are taking various measures to improve productivity and reduce costs. For instance, an increasing number of producers are choosing to cut costs by importing more inputs from Asia. Others are adjusting to the higher Canadian dollar by phasing out production of goods and services with low profit margins and concentrating on those with higher returns.
 
The adjustments being made by firms in response to global economic developments also continued to be reflected in the sectoral composition of employment changes. Employment has tended to rise since the end of 2003 in those industries producing commodities or having low exposure to foreign competition. On the other hand, employment has fallen in the other manufacturing industries highly exposed to international trade, reflecting to some extent the substitution of capital for labour in order to reduce costs. The spring Business Outlook Survey indicates that employment growth over the next 12 months will be concentrated in service industries.
 
This reallocation of capital and labour involves adjustment costs that may cause a temporary slowdown in productivity growth and, therefore, in the growth of potential output.
 
The level of economic activity at the end of 2004 was broadly in line with the Bank's expectations in the January Update. While output growth in the fourth quarter of 2004 was somewhat lower than expected, this was largely offset by upward revisions to Statistics Canada's estimates of growth earlier in the year. At the same time, the Bank's conventional measure of potential output for 2004 was revised down slightly relative to the estimate used in the January Update. As a result, the Bank's conventional measure of the output gap indicated that the economy was operating at about its capacity limits in the fourth quarter of 2004, instead of slightly below its effective capacity, as in the last Update.
 
Other indicators point to greater pressure on capacity than the conventional measure. For instance, capacity utilization in the non-farm, goods-producing sector in the fourth quarter of 2004 remained considerably higher than its average for 2000 to 2003, because growth of capacity in this sector has been relatively low in recent years, owing to weak investment spending and some write-off of uneconomic capacity as a result of relative price changes.
 
Nevertheless, it is important to note that several indicators currently suggest more economic slack than is implied by the conventional measure. On average, the core rate of inflation has been below the 2 per cent midpoint of the target range since mid-2003. As well, wage increases have remained quite moderate, and the proportion of firms reporting labour shortages or difficulties in meeting an unanticipated increase in demand was lower than average in the spring Business Outlook Survey.
 
The degree of economic slack varies across industries and regions because of the ongoing process of adjusting to global changes. But what matters for monetary policy is the economy as a whole.
 
Based on an assessment of all the indicators of capacity pressures, including those from the Business Outlook Survey, the Bank judges that there is slightly more excess supply in the Canadian economy than suggested by its conventional measure. This view of the current size of the output gap is similar to that held in the January Update.
 
The underlying rate of increase in wages, based on such measures as the average hourly earnings of permanent workers, appears to have remained in a range between 2.25 and 3.25 per cent since the middle of 2004. The year-to-year gain in another wage measure - hourly labour compensation in the business sector - was somewhat lower, at 2 per cent at the end of last year.
 
These overall figures mask important regional differences. For example, in Western Canada, wage gains have generally been higher than in the rest of the country, reflecting a greater prevalence of labour shortages in that region.
 
With only a slight increase in productivity over the past year, unit labour costs in the business sector in the fourth quarter of 2004 rose by just under 2 per cent from year-earlier levels. Indeed, productivity growth was surprisingly low in both 2003 and 2004, easing markedly from its average performance over the 1998 to 2002 period. That reduction in productivity growth was broadly based across sectors and stands in sharp contrast to the US experience. The assumption about the pace of productivity growth embodied in the Bank's outlook is discussed in Section 4.
 
With substantial increases in the global prices for Canadian exports of energy commodities and many industrial materials, Canada's terms of trade improved considerably in 2004. As a result, the chain price index for GDP (a broad price measure of the goods and services produced in Canada) rose 4.2 per cent between the fourth quarter of 2003 and the fourth quarter of 2004. By comparison, the prices of goods and services purchased by Canadians rose 2 per cent over the same period. This terms-of-trade improvement has thus produced a significant increase in real income, which has been reflected in the growth of corporate profits and government tax revenues.
 
The price of crude oil has increased further since the end of 2004, reflecting upward revisions to the projected global demand for oil and downward revisions to expected non-OPEC supplies. The prices of non-energy commodities have also risen since the end of 2004. Strengthening demand has contributed to recoveries in the prices of both lumber and pulp. At the same time, continued strong global demand, as well as a number of planned production cutbacks, have led to a further rise in metals prices.
 
For both the global economy and for Canada, financial conditions have remained very favourable since the October Report. Yields and credit spreads on corporate bonds are close to historically low levels. Equity markets have improved over recent months, and market volatility has remained low. Sustained improvement in the balance sheets of Canadian banks, aggressive competition among suppliers of credit, and modest demand for credit have led to continued easing in bank-lending conditions in Canada. Mainly because of strong supply conditions, growth in business credit continues to pick up. Meanwhile, both supply and demand continue to support robust growth in household credit.
 
Business-credit conditions are quite favourable, both in Canada and internationally. In financial markets, the demand for higher-yielding, somewhat riskier products remains strong. Demand is supported by fairly robust corporate earnings and the low yields returned by government securities. This has contributed to high bond prices and relatively low credit spreads.
 
Most equity markets have improved since the October Report, with the TSX Composite Index increasing by about 10 per cent. Much of the improvement in Canada reflects the strong performance of the energy sector.
 
Both gross and net issues by corporations have shown solid growth in Canada. Credit defaults have been at cyclical lows, and the share of credit-rating upgrades in total credit-rating changes continued to rise. The growth of business credit currently stands close to its 10-year average. The pickup in short-term business credit has continued, boosted by easier lending conditions. Growth in long-term business credit (including income trusts) has also remained robust since the October Report, helped by a stable net issuance of bonds and equities. Most of the increase in business credit has reportedly been channelled towards general business operations and debt refinancing rather than towards new investment.
 
Household credit has continued to advance at a rapid pace since the October Report, with both consumer credit and residential mortgage credit contributing to the increase. At the same time, low interest rates and favourable labour market conditions have helped ensure that household balance sheets remain healthy. The elevated level of household credit growth is likely to be associated with strong consumption in the first part of this year.
 
In summary, a broad range of financial indicators point to a considerable amount of liquidity in the global economy, as well as in the Canadian economy.
 
The yield curve in the United States has moved higher since the time of the October Report. It has also continued to flatten, mainly driven by larger increases in short-term interest rates. Futures prices indicate that markets anticipate further increases in the federal funds rate over the remainder of the year, with US forward rates implying a policy rate of approximately 4.0 per cent by the end of December 2005.
 
Canadian asset prices indicate expectations of a more gradual trajectory for increases in interest rates here than in the United States. This divergence in the expected paths for policy rates in the two countries has contributed to sharply declining interest rate differentials across the yield curve. Yields on two-year Canadian bonds are now approximately 60 basis points below those on US Treasuries, and yield spreads on longer-term bonds have turned negative for the first time in over four years.
 
After appreciating sharply from the time of the October Report until early December, major currencies weakened against the US dollar, and the Canadian dollar has traded within a range of 80 to 83 cents US. This has occurred within the context of rising US interest rates, relative economic weakness in Japan and Europe, rising energy prices, and generally high prices for other commodities.
 
On balance, the global economy has been performing largely as expected at the time of the October Report, and growth is projected to remain relatively strong, at around 4 per cent in both 2005 and 2006, in spite of higher oil prices. While the overall growth picture for the next two years has changed little from the October Report, the distribution of growth is more uneven among major economies than previously expected, with upward revisions to the already strong growth prospects in non-Japan Asia offsetting downward adjustments to the growth outlook in Japan and the European Union.
 
Recent economic developments in the United States suggest that underlying momentum remains strong. Real GDP grew at an annual rate of 4 per cent in the third quarter of 2004 and 3.8 per cent in the fourth quarter. Consumer spending and business investment were both very robust in the second half of the year. Despite the significant real effective depreciation of the US dollar, net exports continued to restrain growth in the second half of 2004. Evidence to date indicates that growth remained near 4 per cent in the first quarter of 2005.
 
The US economy is expected to post growth rates that will be somewhat above potential in 2005 and 2006, albeit lower than in 2004. As a result, excess supply (estimated at somewhat below 1 per cent of GDP at the end of 2004) should be largely eliminated over the next two years. Business investment should remain solid, since the capital stock appears unusually low at this point in the cycle. Moreover, the past depreciation of the US dollar should contribute to a strong recovery in export growth. Meanwhile, household expenditures are likely to slow, partly because of the dampening impact of higher oil prices and of past and anticipated increases in interest rates.
 
At the same time, the contribution of Asia (excluding Japan) to the world economic expansion is slightly greater than previously expected. In particular, growth in China has remained surprisingly buoyant despite the implementation of administrative tightening measures and higher domestic interest rates. Accordingly, the outlook calls for a more gradual slowing profile than was assumed at the time of the October Report.
 
In contrast, growth in Japan turned out to be weaker than anticipated. Following a sharp rise in the first quarter of 2004, real GDP was relatively stagnant throughout the remainder of the year, owing largely to the impact of an inventory correction in IT-related sectors, higher oil prices, and typhoons. A gradual pickup in quarterly growth throughout 2005 is expected, as the effect of the adverse factors that restrained aggregate demand in the latter part of 2004 diminishes. Nevertheless, the average annual growth rate in 2005 should be significantly lower than in 2004, owing to the low starting point.
 
In the euro area, real economic activity in the final quarter of 2004 was also weaker than anticipated, and the outlook has been revised down marginally. A gradual pickup in the rate of growth of economic activity is expected this year and next, as the adverse impact stemming from the past appreciation of the euro and the rise in world oil prices gradually tapers off.
 
While the overall global short-term outlook is favourable, a number of risks and uncertainties remain, including the future course of oil prices, the pace of expansion in China, and geopolitical developments. A key risk relates to the unfolding of current account imbalances, with the risk of a disorderly correction growing over time if the imbalances persist. Indeed, despite a substantial real effective depreciation of the US dollar since early 2002, external imbalances have continued to widen and are likely to continue to do so in the near term. An orderly correction of external imbalances will require increased savings in the United States, a strengthening of demand elsewhere, notably in Japan and Europe, combined with further real effective depreciation of the US dollar. Greater exchange rate flexibility in Asia would facilitate the adjustment.
 
The projected global economic expansion should help maintain the US-dollar prices of non-energy commodities at relatively high levels over the remainder of 2005 and through 2006, although some easing is likely as new supplies become available. On the other hand, any further real depreciation of the US dollar would put upward pressure on non-energy commodity prices, expressed in US-dollar terms. With regard to crude oil, the Bank's base-case scenario - which is based on recent futures prices - assumes that prices will be close to US$57 per barrel over the remainder of 2005 and then ease slightly to about US$54 per barrel by the second half of 2006. Natural gas prices are expected to stay at relatively high levels through 2006. The Bank's base-case scenario for oil prices is markedly higher than in the January Update.
 
Given the effects of the past and recent appreciation of the Canadian dollar, the Bank expects growth, on an average annual basis, of about 2.5 per cent in 2005. Growth should pick up to about 3.25 per cent in 2006. The Bank's outlook for growth in 2005 is slightly lower than projected in the January Update, reflecting weaker-than-expected growth in the fourth quarter of 2004. Projected quarterly growth through the year, however, is unchanged from the January Update. While the Bank's growth projection for 2005 is the same as the latest Consensus outlook, the projection for 2006 is slightly higher.
 
The Bank's projection assumes real GDP growth of 2.5 per cent, at an annual rate, during the first half of 2005. This is expected to move up to about 3 per cent in the second half of this year and to about 3.5 per cent over the four quarters of 2006. The lower rate of growth projected for the first half of 2005 stems mainly from the anticipated slowing in the rate of inventory accumulation. This outlook for growth implies a modest rise in excess supply in the first half of 2005 and a return to production capacity in the second half of 2006.
 
Were it to persist, the sluggish growth in labour productivity in the past two years would put the Bank's projection for potential output growth at risk. However, recent and projected increases in business investment, as well as continued rapid growth in labour productivity in the United States, make it reasonable to assume a resumption of productivity growth. In addition, there may be some upside risks to the trend rate of growth of labour inputs, at least over the near term. Therefore, at this time, the Bank continues to project growth in production capacity of 3 per cent. This is based on the assumptions of trend growth of 1 1/4 per cent in labour inputs and trend growth of 1 3/4 per cent in labour productivity.
 
Economic expansion in Canada this year and next is expected to be supported primarily by the continued substantial growth of final domestic demand. This view is essentially unchanged from that of the January Update. As noted earlier, there is still considerable monetary stimulus supporting demand at this time. The Bank's outlook continues to incorporate a reduction of monetary stimulus over the projection period.
 
Capital spending by businesses is projected to increase even more strongly than last year, reflecting the global economic expansion and the associated high levels of prices for both energy and non-energy commodities, very favourable financial conditions, high profit levels, and further decreases in the prices of imported machinery and equipment. Ongoing gains in real incomes, the effects of monetary stimulus, and the high level of consumer confidence should contribute to further solid growth in consumer spending. However, following the rapid increases in recent years, housing investment, on balance, is expected to remain unchanged over this period. Spending on renovations is projected to rise strongly, offsetting the impact of anticipated reductions in housing starts and resale activity.
 
This outlook incorporates the expectations that spending by all levels of government will rise at about the same rate as revenues, as governments continue to work to maintain fiscal balance.
 
Further economic growth abroad, especially in the United States, should lead to increased demand for Canadian exports. However, this is expected to be more than offset by rapid growth in imports in both 2005 and 2006. The past appreciation of the Canadian dollar is expected to continue to dampen the growth of Canada's exports and to boost import growth over the projection period. As well, imports will be boosted by strong investment in machinery and equipment.
 
In the January Update, the high level of oil prices was expected to have a slight adverse effect on aggregate demand in Canada in 2005, before the positive impact on investment and production in the energy sector became evident in 2006. Given the markedly higher outlook for oil prices in this Report, the downside pressure on demand for Canadian exports and on household spending is likely to be somewhat larger than expected in the last Update. However, stronger-than-expected growth in capital spending by energy producers, based on recent investment intentions, should more than offset that negative effect by 2006.
 
Most indicators of inflation expectations that the Bank follows have been little changed since mid-October, and many of the key medium - and longer-term measures remain very close to 2 per cent. In the regular survey reported in the winter issue of the Conference Board of Canada's Index of Business Confidence, 74 per cent of respondents expected prices, in general, to rise over the next six months at a rate of 2 per cent or less, virtually unchanged from last autumn. However, even though 93 per cent of firms in the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey expected CPI inflation to be within a range of 1 to 3 per cent, on average, over the next two years, 60 per cent of respondents expected inflation to be in the upper part of the range. On the other hand, the average private sector forecast for total CPI inflation in both 2005 and 2006 is just under 2 per cent. Consensus forecasts of inflation for 2007 and beyond also continue to be very close to 2 per cent.
 
There remains a risk that the higher costs arising from the persistently high level of the global prices of energy and other raw materials could be passed through to the prices of non-energy goods and services. Indeed, there is some anecdotal evidence that part of the sharply higher costs of some metals is raising the prices of some durable goods, such as major appliances. The most recent experience, however, suggests that this pass-through effect is likely to be relatively small and spread out over time.
 
In contrast, the appreciation of the Canadian dollar since early 2003 is expected to be a continuing source of slight downward pressure on core inflation during the projection period. There also appear to be ongoing reductions in the world prices of some consumer goods as a result of increasing supplies from countries such as China.
 
Increases in average hourly earnings of permanent workers are expected to move up somewhat through 2006. Nevertheless, with labour-productivity growth anticipated to resume over this period, year-to-year gains in unit labour costs should remain at or below 2 per cent through the projection period. Implications of money growth
 
Growth in the narrow money aggregates - M1+ and M1++ - has slowed since the last Report and is broadly consistent with projected output growth of slightly above 2 per cent in the first quarter of 2005.
 
Since the October Report, the growth of M2++ has stabilized at just under 6 per cent on a year-over-year basis, despite the strength in the narrow money aggregates over the same period. This rate of growth for M2++ is consistent with inflation under 2 per cent.
 
The small amount of excess supply projected for the Canadian economy should keep core inflation slightly below longer-run expectations through 2005 and most of 2006. The past and recent appreciation of the Canadian dollar is also expected to exert a small amount of downward pressure on the core rate during this period.
 
The core rate of inflation is projected to stay near 1.7 per cent through to the end of 2005. With the economy expected to move back to its production potential in the second half of 2006 and with inflation expectations remaining well anchored, the core rate should rise gradually to 2 per cent around the end of 2006.
 
The outlook for the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI will continue to be crucially affected by developments in the market for crude oil. Based on the scenario embodied in oil-price futures, total CPI inflation is projected to stay above 2 per cent for some time, before moving down slightly below 2 per cent in the second half of 2006.