In an environment of continued high uncertainty, the global recession has intensified and become more synchronous since the Bank's January Monetary Policy Report Update, with weaker-than-expected activity in all major economies. Deteriorating credit conditions have spread quickly through trade, financial, and confidence channels. While more aggressive monetary and fiscal policy actions are under way across the g-20, measures to stabilize the global financial system have taken longer than expected to enact. As a result, the recession in Canada will be deeper than anticipated, with the economy projected to contract by 3.0 per cent in 2009. The Bank now expects the recovery to be delayed until the fourth quarter and to be more gradual. The economy is projected to grow by 2.5 per cent in 2010 and 4.7 per cent in 2011, and to reach its production capacity in the third quarter of 2011. Given significant restructuring in a number of sectors, potential growth has been revised down. The recovery will be importantly supported by the Bank's accommodative monetary stance.
 
The Bank expects core inflation to diminish through 2009, gradually returning to the 2 per cent target in the third quarter of 2011 as aggregate supply and demand return to balance. Total CPI inflation is expected to trough at -0.8 per cent in the third quarter of 2009 and return to target in the third quarter of 2011.
 
Global developments continue to pose significant risks to the Bank's inflation projection for Canada, on both the upside and the downside. On the upside, confidence may return more rapidly than anticipated if convincing action is taken more quickly than assumed to address financial system weaknesses in major economies. This could result in a stronger-than-projected recovery in the global economy as the aggressive and coordinated macroeconomic policy actions already being implemented take effect. On the downside, the global recession could be deeper and more protracted than envisaged if the resolution of these financial system problems is delayed further. More generally, there are risks around the resolution of global imbalances. The underlying macroeconomic risks are roughly balanced.
 
When monetary policy is conducted at the effective lower bound, the uncertainty regarding the effects of unconventional monetary policies in the event that the recession turns out to be more protracted than expected, and the resulting need for prudence in the use of these instruments, imply that the overall risks to the Bank's inflation projection are tilted slightly to the downside.
 
On 21 April, the Bank lowered its target for the overnight rate by one-quarter of a percentage point to 1/4 per cent, which the Bank judges to be the effective lower bound for that rate. Conditional on the outlook for inflation, the target overnight rate can be expected to remain at its current level until the end of the second quarter of 2010 in order to achieve the inflation target. The Bank will continue to provide guidance in its scheduled interest rate announcements as long as the overnight rate is at the effective lower bound.
 
To reinforce its conditional commitment to maintain the overnight rate at 1/4 per cent, the Bank will roll over a portion of its existing stock of 1 - and 3-month term purchase and resale agreements into 6 - and 12-month terms at minimum and maximum bid rates that correspond to the target rate and the Bank rate, respectively.
 
The 21 April decision brings the cumulative monetary policy easing to 425 basis points since December 2007. It is the Bank's judgment that this cumulative easing, together with the conditional commitment, is the appropriate policy stance to move the economy back to full production capacity and to achieve the 2 per cent inflation target.
 
The Bank retains considerable flexibility in the conduct of monetary policy at low interest rates. The annex to this report describes the Bank of Canada's approach to conducting monetary policy when the overnight interest rate is at the effective lower bound. Additional stimulus could be provided, if needed, through quantitative and/or credit easing. Definitions of these actions and the principles guiding their possible use can be found in the annex.
 
While the global recession has intensified since the January Update and become more synchronous, the broad profile of the Bank's outlook remains consistent with the projection at that time. A deepening financial crisis in the united states and Europe triggered a severe recession in the global economy at the end of 2008, as deteriorating conditions in the advanced economies spread quickly around the world through trade, financial, and confidence channels. Concerted policy measures across the g-20 provide the necessary and appropriate support for global recovery, although the recovery will be delayed by slower progress in stabilizing the global financial system than previously anticipated.
 
Heightened uncertainty surrounding the global outlook, together with declining wealth and tighter credit conditions, has adversely affected confidence levels, causing households and firms to cut back spending sharply. The knock-on effect on global trade has been much larger than expected, reflecting both a sudden collapse in trade credit and an abrupt inventory correction in the auto and electronics sectors. Export-oriented countries in Asia and Europe have experienced sharp declines in industrial production.
 
The pervasive and intense nature of the economic downturn has exacerbated strains on Banks' balance sheets and further constrained the availability of credit to businesses and households, leading to additional weakness in demand. As a result of this adverse feedback loop, global GDP growth has hit post-world war ii lows in recent quarters.
 
Policy-makers in the major economies have responded to the global crisis with bold policy actions. The G-20 countries have committed to do whatever is necessary to restore growth and stability in their economies. Monetary authorities have lowered policy rates aggressively, and several central banks have adopted unconventional monetary policy measures, including quantitative and credit easing. fiscal authorities have introduced substantial stimulus packages to help offset the drop in domestic and foreign demand. The fact that these fiscal initiatives are being undertaken simultaneously in several countries will augment their impact. The effects of these policies will be increasingly felt over time and should reach full force in 2010.
 
Timely and credible action is required to address the impaired assets on bank balance sheets and to restore the normal flow of credit - a precondition for sustained economic recovery. Progress on these measures has been slower than expected in the united states and other major financial centres. However, comprehensive programs have recently been outlined to provide additional liquidity, guarantee bank balance sheets, dispose of bad assets, and recapitalize as appropriate. The challenge now is to ensure their rapid and effective implementation.
 
As anticipated in the January Update, economic activity in the united states contracted sharply in the fourth quarter of 2008, and recent indicators suggest a similar contraction in the first quarter of 2009. The weakness was most evident in sectors that are particularly important for Canadian exports, magnifying the effects of the US. Downturn on the Canadian economy. US residential construction has remained very weak, with a large overhang of unsold houses continuing to put downward pressure on house prices and building activity. Motor vehicle sales and production have also experienced a sharp cyclical and structural correction, as manufacturers cut output in response to sagging demand, mounting losses, and limited access to auto financing. There are, nevertheless, early signs that activity levels in both the housing and auto sectors may be starting to stabilize in response to the sizable adjustments that have taken place.
 
In Europe and Japan, the decline in output has been more acute than expected over the recent period, as falling external demand and mounting internal strains spilled over into the domestic economy. Deteriorating conditions in housing markets, falling consumer and business confidence, and continuing difficulties in the financial sectors of many overseas countries have added to these external pressures. Japan and Germany have been particularly affected by the collapse in global demand for autos and it - related goods, as well as by the past appreciations of their currencies. Output growth in china has moderated, but has nevertheless remained much stronger than that in most other emerging-market economies. Aggressive fiscal stimulus measures and monetary easing have boosted domestic demand and partly offset the fall in exports.
 
Following a sharp decline in the second half of 2008, commodity prices appear to have levelled off. Production cuts by OPEC have outpaced the fall in global demand, contributing to a modest recovery in oil prices. While the price of natural gas has continued to decline, prices of other, non-energy, commodities have recently increased.
 
As highlighted in the January Update, stabilization of the global financial system remains a precondition for economic recovery. Despite some recent signs of improvement, market conditions are mixed, and the outlook remains uncertain. on the positive side, there are indications that the aggressive actions taken by central banks and governments are beginning to gain traction, and volatility has fallen in a number of financial markets. In addition, stock markets, after reaching multi-year lows earlier this year, have started to price in a more positive outlook. Global credit markets, in contrast, are still fragile, with improvements largely confined to short-term funding markets, while longer-term spreads remain elevated. The cost of funds for business borrowers - especially lower-quality credit risks also remains high, and surveys of senior loan officers indicate that lending standards for consumers continue to tighten, albeit at a slower pace.
 
Conditions in global financial markets over the next few quarters will be shaped by two main developments. The first concerns the weaker current state of the real economy and the additional credit-related losses that this might entail for financial institutions, as delinquencies and loan losses begin to rise. The second development relates to remedial efforts directed at the illiquid legacy assets on banks' balance sheets. Stress tests designed to provide a credible and comprehensive assessment of the true situation, together with capital injections and guarantees, should facilitate price discovery, reduce concerns about counterparty risk, and boost liquidity. Although the normalization of financial conditions is likely to be delayed by the increased drag coming from the real economy and from the delayed implementation of remedial measures in the banking sector, on balance, more widespread improvements should become evident by mid-2010.
 
Global economic growth for 2009 has been revised down in the Bank's latest projection, reflecting the recent sharp decline in economic activity. The growth profile also incorporates a delayed and slightly more protracted recovery compared with that in the January Update. As a result, output growth is now projected to remain negative for most of 2009 and to begin to absorb excess production capacity only towards the middle of 2010. The return to potential will be postponed by the self-reinforcing nature of the adverse feedback loop that has developed, and by the additional drag exerted by a financial system that will take longer to stabilize. Inflation rates are consequently expected to be lower than previously projected, and to dip below zero in some countries.
 
Global output is now projected to fall by 0.8 per cent in 2009, and to increase by a more modest 2.2 per cent in 2010 - well below the rate of growth of global potential output. Three important factors will help support the gradual recovery. First, economic activity in all major regions should be boosted by the strong and simultaneous monetary and fiscal policy actions that have been undertaken, which will raise aggregate demand and help to restore consumer and business confidence. Second, as measures to stabilize the financial system begin to take hold, businesses and households should become less credit-constrained. Third, the drag exerted by the housing market correction in the united states and several other industrial countries should diminish, leading to a pickup in construction activity.
 
As anticipated in the January Update, the recovery in the united states will be much more muted than normal. Sustained positive growth will likely be deferred by one quarter compared with the Bank's earlier projection, owing to the delayed implementation of stabilization measures in the banking sector. annual GDP growth in the united states is projected to average -2.4 per cent in 2009 and 1.2 per cent in 2010, as diminished wealth, a weak labour market, tight credit conditions, and reduced confidence restrain growth in consumption and business investment. Activity is expected to stabilize in the second half of 2009 and to begin rising in early 2010, exceeding the growth rate of potential output and starting to take up excess capacity. Sales and production of motor vehicles, which are currently well below replacement rates, are projected to rebound in the second half of 2009 but to levels significantly lower than their pre-crisis levels, as the auto sector continues to restructure. The housing sector, which has acted as a major drag on growth, should also finally stabilize in the second half of 2009 and contribute to the recovery.
 
The recovery in other industrial economies will be more delayed and more gradual than in the united states, owing to the less-ambitious policy actions undertaken so far and to ongoing difficulties in their banking systems. completion of the inventory cycle in motor vehicles will lead to a gradual pickup in Asian and European auto production, while accelerating US growth will stimulate global economic activity through improved trade and financial flows, as well as rising confidence. Economic growth in china, in contrast, is expected to remain relatively robust, assisted by the introduction of additional fiscal and monetary stimulus measures to boost domestic demand and reduce the country's reliance on exports. Economic conditions in other emerging-market economies are projected to improve gradually over this period, producing a synchronous boost in global demand and providing some support for commodity prices over the medium term. Energy prices are assumed to move in line with current futures prices, while non-energy prices are expected to strengthen gradually as economic activity recovers.
 
In the January Update, the Bank projected a sharp recession in Canada, followed by a relatively muted recovery starting in the third quarter of this year. As a result of the more severe, synchronized nature of the global downturn, the recession in Canada is even deeper than anticipated. As well, the Bank now expects the recovery to be delayed until the fourth quarter of 2009 and to be more gradual than projected in January. Nonetheless, the Bank is still projecting a rebound to above-potential growth in 2010, albeit with a lower estimate of potential output growth. As explained in January, the recovery should be supported by a number of factors, including the timeliness and scale of the Bank's monetary policy response; our relatively well-functioning financial system and the gradual improvement in financial conditions in Canada; the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar; stimulative fiscal policy measures; the gradual rebound in external demand; the strength of Canadian household, business, and bank balance sheets; and the end of the stock adjustments in Canadian and US Residential housing.
 
As a result of the sharper contraction in the global economy, economic growth in Canada has been much weaker than anticipated in the January Update. Export volumes fell sharply in the fourth quarter of 2008, led by dramatic declines in exports of motor vehicles and construction-related products to the united states. The terms of trade also plunged, causing real gross domestic income to register its largest quarterly decline on record. Canadian households reduced their spending by more than anticipated in response to the decline in their net worth and an elevated level of economic uncertainty. In total, the volume of final sales of goods declined by about 11 per cent (at annual rates) in the final quarter of 2008. given the surprising speed and magnitude of this decline, firms were slow to adjust production and therefore accumulated unwanted inventories. The stock-to-sales ratio rose to its highest level in more than a decade. Although this mitigated the decline in real GDP in the quarter, the 3.4 per cent (at annual rates) fall that was recorded was larger than the 2.3 per cent projected in the January Update. An inventory correction will therefore be needed, which will put additional downward pressure on growth this year.
 
The economic contraction in Canada intensified significantly in the first quarter of 2009. Exports of automotive products, forest products, and industrial materials posted further substantial declines. Firms have started to address their inventory problems, with widespread shutdowns in the automotive sector in particular. Business investment is expected to register another steep decline in response to rising unused capacity and weak terms of trade.
 
Economy-wide, firms cut about 270,000 jobs in the first quarter and reduced the average work week. Deteriorating labour market conditions, combined with an additional decline in household net worth, are expected to cause further weakness in household spending. Government spending is the only component of demand expected to show positive growth in the quarter. overall, real GDP is projected to drop at an annual rate of 7.3 per cent in the first quarter - the largest quarterly decline on record since 1961.
 
Recent developments are also adversely affecting the growth rate of potential output. restructuring, especially in the automotive and forest products sectors, is expected to render some of the existing capital stock obsolete. The weaker profile for investment in this projection, relative to previous ones, should also contribute to dampening the growth of trend labour productivity. In light of these factors, the Bank has revised down its assumptions for the growth rate of potential output to 1.2 per cent in 2009, 1.5 per cent in 2010, and 1.9 per cent in 2011.
 
Excess supply in the Canadian economy emerged at the end of 2008 and has expanded rapidly. The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap suggests that the economy was operating about 3.5 per cent below its production potential in the first quarter of 2009. In the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey, the percentage of firms reporting that they would have difficulty meeting an unanticipated increase in demand fell to an exceptionally low level. Labour market indicators have started to reflect the downturn in the product market. This is particularly evident in the escalation of the unemployment rate between December and March to its highest level in seven years. The percentage of firms reporting labour shortages in the Bank's spring survey fell to the lowest level in 10 years. In contrast, the 12-month change in the average hourly earnings of permanent workers, reported by statistics Canada in the Labour Force Survey, has shown surprising strength since last autumn.
 
After reviewing all the indicators of capacity pressures, the governing council judges that the economy was operating about 3 per cent below its production capacity in the first quarter of 2009.
 
Total CPI inflation has evolved largely as projected in the January Update with a slightly faster deceleration in the core rate of inflation being offset by a smaller decline in energy prices. The latter reflects larger-than-expected increases in the spreads between crude oil prices and gasoline prices. In march, the 12-month rate of increase in total CPI was 1.2 per cent, down from 2.0 per cent in November.
 
The core rate of inflation reached 2.0 per cent in march, owing largely to a faster-than-expected deceleration in auto prices, which have been unusually volatile in recent months. Core food prices have continued to rise steeply, but this is not expected to persist, given the sharp drop in the prices of agricultural commodities over the past year. With the rise in food prices decelerating and the substantial excess supply gap that has developed, both core and total inflation are poised to slow further over the next few months.
 
Reflecting the weakness in the economy and past declines in energy prices, measures of near-term inflation expectations have continued to fall in recent months. The latest consensus economics forecast for total CPI inflation is 0.2 per cent for 2009. The forecast moves back up to 1.8 per cent for 2010, indicating that medium-term inflation expectations remain well anchored to the 2 per cent inflation target.
 
Financial conditions in Canada remain more favourable than in other advanced economies. The underlying strength of the balance sheets of Canadian financial institutions, corporations, and households has made the Canadian financial system better able to weather global storms. Nonetheless, conditions are noticeably tighter than normal, since the global crisis and its associated macroeconomic consequences have led to a widening of lending spreads in many markets and, in particular, a tightening of credit conditions for corporations. Recently, there have been some signs of improvement, although it is too soon to conclude that conditions will return quickly to normal.
 
Borrowing costs for banks decreased by about 95 basis points from mid-January through mid-April, owing to the 100-basis-point reduction in the policy interest rate over that period. The reduction in bank funding costs has, to a significant extent, been passed on to households. The effective average nominal interest rate on household borrowing has eased further since January to well below its level at the start of the financial turbulence; it is also low by historical standards. The growth of household credit remains surprisingly strong in light of the weakness of household spending; however, it has decelerated over the past six months, led by slower growth in residential mortgage credit, and is likely to slow further in the period ahead.
 
Canadian businesses are facing more difficult financing conditions. The pricing and availability of business credit, as reported in the Bank's latest Senior Loan Officer Survey and Business Outlook Survey, tightened further over the past three months. Credit spreads for both financial and non-financial issuers remain near record levels but have begun to narrow recently; with the continued decline in government yields, the level of borrowing rates has held relatively steady. Issuance by non-financial corporations is running at a higher level than in the same period last year, as investors have been attracted by the high spreads available on corporate bonds issued by good-quality borrowers, while corporations have taken advantage of the improved access to capital markets to lock in longer-term funding.
 
The combined effects of various financial factors impinging on real economic activity are summarized in the financial conditions index , which weights a set of financial variables in proportion to their impact on real GDP. Such an index needs to be interpreted with caution, given the inherent difficulty of quantifying the effects of changes in financial variables on the real economy and the short span of some of the data used. For this reason, changes in the FCI are likely to be more informative than its level. The index shows the marked deterioration of Canadian financial conditions in the final quarter of 2008 to their tightest point in the past 10 years, as corporate bond rates and spreads rose in response to declining investor appetite for riskier assets. Since January, financial conditions have improved somewhat, as stock market gains and a lower overnight rate have partially offset continued higher yields on corporate bonds. Nonetheless, financial conditions remain tight. Further information on a range of indicators used by the Bank to monitor credit conditions is presented on the new credit conditions web page at.
 
Monetary aggregates continued to grow strongly, despite tightening financial conditions and declining nominal GDP growth. This reflects an increase in money demand associated with low interest rates and portfolio shifts into more liquid assets. In the three months to February, the narrow aggregate m1+ grew at an annual rate of 14.2 per cent, while M2++ grew by 9.9 per cent. It is difficult, though, to draw the implications of this monetary expansion for economic activity, particularly since the demand for money is likely to shift even more than usual at low interest rates.
 
Since the January Update, the Canadian dollar has traded in a range of 77 to 83 cents US, averaging about 80 cents US. Recent support from strengthening oil prices has been largely offset by the weakening economy, leaving the Canadian dollar largely unchanged since the January Update.
 
Canadian fiscal and monetary policies have been eased substantially in response to the deteriorating macroeconomic situation, as part of the coordinated global response. Significant additional fiscal and monetary stimulus has been provided since the January Update.
 
The federal budget announced on 27 January will deliver substantial fiscal stimulus over the 2009-10 period, and further stimulus is being provided by provincial budgets. The effects of this fiscal expansion will begin to be felt in the second half of 2009 and will build through next year.
 
Monetary policy was also eased significantly over this period, bringing the cumulative easing to 425 basis points since December 2007. The Bank of Canada lowered its target for the overnight interest rate by 50 basis points on 3 march and by a further 25 basis points on 21 April. The Bank judges the resulting level of the overnight rate, 25 basis points, to be the effective lower bound for that rate. Conditional on the inflation outlook, the Bank committed to hold the target overnight rate at that level until the second quarter of 2010. it is the Bank's judgment that this cumulative easing, together with the conditional commitment, is the appropriate policy stance to move the economy back to full capacity and to achieve the 2 per cent inflation target.
 
The Bank's base-case projection incorporates the following key assumptions: a Canada/US. Exchange rate averaging 80 cents US; energy prices in line with recent futures prices; prices for non-energy commodities increasing progressively as the global economy recovers; and tight global credit conditions persisting through mid-2010, before improving gradually.
 
The Bank's base-case projection now sees the Canadian economy contracting through to the third quarter of 2009 (one quarter longer than in the January Update), with real GDP dropping by 3.0 per cent this year on an annual average basis. This is much weaker than anticipated in January, reflecting two main factors: foreign weakness propagating through trade, financial, and confidence channels, which has been more intense than previously projected; and delays in the implementation of policies (especially in the united states) to stabilize and recapitalize the global financial system, which have weighed on both financial conditions and confidence.
 
Export volumes are projected to fall significantly in the first half of 2009, reflecting the continued weakness in foreign demand for Canadian motor vehicles, industrial goods, and commodities.
 
Final domestic demand is expected to contract until the third quarter of 2009, owing to persistent weakness in private domestic demand. The weakness in household spending is mainly due to lower expected real incomes, stemming from the deterioration in labour market conditions, weaker terms of trade, and lower growth in potential output. Households have also experienced an erosion in their wealth because of declines in equity and house prices. These factors, combined with heightened uncertainty about future incomes and asset prices, have led consumers to increase their desired savings rate. Resale activity in the housing market has slowed significantly, reflecting these developments. Investment in housing is expected to post outright decreases until late 2009.
 
Business fixed investment is expected to contract sharply in 2009, reflecting a drop in corporate profits, tight credit conditions, weak commodity prices, and the uncertain economic outlook. The projected decline in investment spending is consistent with the results of the Bank's recent Business Outlook Survey and statistics Canada's Survey of Private and Public Investment Intentions. Firms also need to draw down their inventories, following the sharp buildup in recent months. Inventory decumulation is projected to subtract significantly from GDP growth during the first three quarters of this year.
 
Weak domestic demand in Canada is expected to lead to a large drop in import volumes in 2009, which more than offsets the weakness in sales abroad.
 
As in January, real GDP growth is projected to rebound to rates above that of potential output in the final quarter of 2009. On an average annual basis, the economy is projected to grow by 2.5 per cent in 2010 and by 4.7 per cent in 2011. A large part of the downward revision to growth in 2010 is due to the lower assumed growth rate of potential output, relative to the January Update.
 
The anticipated normalization of financial conditions, together with the stimulus coming from monetary and fiscal policies, should restore consumer and business confidence and boost spending in 2010. As well, housing starts should gradually pick up, supported by historically low mortgage rates and demographic requirements of about 175,000 units per year. Exports are expected to recover in response to the gradual improvement in external demand and the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar.
 
The Canadian economy is projected to grow more rapidly than the US economy in 2010 and 2011 for a number of reasons. The need for households to repair their balance sheets is smaller in Canada than in the united states, since wealth losses have been smaller. The housing market correction is expected to be much less severe in Canada than in the united states. As well, Canadian exporters will benefit disproportionately from the recovery in the US. Housing and automotive sectors, which will push the growth rate of US. Demand for Canadian goods above the projected rate of growth of US Real GDP.
 
Owing to the near-term weakness in the growth of aggregate demand, excess supply in the Canadian economy continues to build, expanding in the second half of 2009 to about 4.5 per cent, roughly 0.75 percentage points larger than projected in the January Update. As the economy picks up in the fourth quarter and accelerates in 2010-11, excess supply is gradually absorbed, and the economy is expected to reach its productive capacity in the third quarter of 2011.
 
The development of substantial excess supply, together with a noticeable deceleration in food prices and modest decreases in house prices, should cause the core rate of inflation to diminish through 2009, reaching a trough of 0.9 per cent in the fourth quarter. This is slightly lower than expected in January, reflecting the wider output gap. With excess supply being absorbed gradually, and with inflation expectations well anchored, the core rate is projected to return to 2 per cent in the third quarter of 2011.
 
As in January, total CPI inflation is expected to fall much more rapidly, dipping below zero in the second and third quarters of 2009, reflecting year-on-year drops in energy prices. The weaker profile for core inflation notwithstanding, the trough for total CPI inflation is not quite as low as in the January Update, reflecting the Bank's assumption that recent margins between crude oil prices and gasoline prices will be maintained over the projection horizon. Total CPI inflation is also expected to return to the Bank's 2 per cent target in the third quarter of 2011.
 
Global developments continue to pose significant risks to the Bank's inflation projection for Canada, on both the upside and the downside. On the upside, confidence may return more rapidly than envisaged, if convincing action is taken more quickly than assumed to address financial system weaknesses in major economies. This could result in a stronger-than-projected recovery in the global economy as the aggressive and coordinated macroeconomic policy actions already being implemented take effect. On the downside, the global recession could be deeper and more protracted than envisaged if the resolution of these financial system problems is delayed further. more generally, there are risks around the resolution of global imbalances. While cyclical developments appear to be contributing to a narrowing of large current account imbalances, a lasting and orderly resolution will require policies to promote a rebalancing of domestic demand across major economic areas. In addition to these global risks, important uncertainties are associated with the difficult adjustments under way in certain sectors of the Canadian economy, notably energy and automotive.
 
The uncertainty regarding the effects of unconventional monetary policies, in the event that the recession turns out to be more protracted than expected, and the resulting need for prudence in the use of these instruments, imply that the risks to the Bank's inflation projection are tilted slightly to the downside.
 
The Bank has attempted to quantify the uncertainties surrounding the inflation projection by using fan charts. Charts a and B in technical Box 2 show the uncertainty around the projection for core and total CPI inflation. They show, in particular, the slight downward tilt to the confidence bands that results from monetary policy operating at the effective lower bound.