The outlook for economic growth is diverging across regions and remains reliant upon exceptional monetary policy stimulus. Private and public sector debt are now at even higher levels than before the global financial crisis, while weak global growth prospects have undermined debt-servicing capacity. The resulting deleveraging continues to be an important headwind to global growth. Another headwind is the low confidence in economic prospects, which has dampened business investment and world trade. In this context, a substantial decline in oil prices, reflecting increased supply together with weaker demand prospects, has lowered the profile for Canada's terms of trade.
 
Despite these headwinds, as progress is made on deleveraging and confidence improves, global GDP growth is expected to pick up from about 3 per cent in 2014 to 3 1/2 per cent in 2015 and 2016. This global profile is weaker than the projections in the July Monetary Policy Report. In those advanced economies, such as the United States, where the policy response to the global financial crisis and subsequent recession was more aggressive and sustained, the recovery is more robust, as private deleveraging and fiscal consolidation are mainly complete. In contrast, the recoveries in the euro area and Japan have lost momentum as those regions struggle to overcome persistent headwinds and structural impediments to growth. A key concern for the global projection is the extent to which the US recovery may be restrained by slower growth in other regions - repeating the serial disappointments that have plagued the global economy since the crisis.
 
Highly accommodative monetary policies are contributing to the economic recoveries in many countries and have underpinned developments in financial markets. Long-term bond yields in North America have declined and in Japan are close to historical lows, as they were at the time of the July Report. European bond yields have also declined to unusually low levels, in response to disappointing GDP growth, falling inflation expectations and further monetary easing .
 
Market sentiment has deteriorated in recent weeks, as evidenced by a repricing of riskier assets. Even with this repricing, however, financial conditions remain accommodative. Credit spreads, especially in the lower-rated credits, as well as bond spreads for emerging markets, have widened from their recent compressed levels, but remain tight by historical standards. Although recent declines in global stock market indexes have erased all of this year's strong gains, there has still been a considerable reaccumulation of wealth over the post-crisis period. While volatility has also risen across various markets from the subdued levels reached in the summer, it remains low by historical standards for most asset classes.
 
In light of the uneven global recovery, monetary policies may diverge further across regions in the period ahead. After aggressively expanding its balance sheet, the US Federal Reserve is expected to announce the end of its asset purchases in October. In contrast, the Bank of Japan is continuing to expand its balance sheet, and the European Central Bank undertook further actions in September to support economic growth in the euro area. Market expectations for future policy rates imply different paths for monetary policy across regions.
 
The divergence in market-implied monetary policy paths and expected economic growth rates is, to some extent, contributing to the strength of the US dollar, which has appreciated since the July Report against a number of currencies, including the Canadian dollar.
 
Momentum in the US economy is strengthening. Economic growth has rebounded from a negative first quarter as the effects of temporary and one-off factors-including a harsh winter, a marked drop in exports and a large inventory correction - were reversed. Nonetheless, labour resources remain significantly underutilized and wage gains have been modest, suggesting that there is still a fair degree of slack in the economy.
 
Real GDP growth in the United States is projected to pick up in the second half of 2014 to average close to 3 per cent over 2015-16. Based on the past dispersion of private sector forecasts, US economic growth in 2015 is anticipated to be within ±0.5 percentage points of the Bank's projection, with a somewhat wider range in 2016. For the first time since 2010, fiscal headwinds have abated. In fact, government spending is expected to contribute positively to GDP growth in 2014 and beyond. Deleveraging by households and businesses appears to be largely complete. Consumption growth is expected to be underpinned by gains in household wealth and employment, as well as by lower commodity prices. Indeed, the lower assumed oil price (compared with the July Report) is estimated to raise the level of US GDP by 0.2 to 0.4 per cent over the projection horizon.
 
A sharp rise in mortgage rates in the middle of 2013 and the relatively weak rate of new household formation have resulted in disappointing housing activity over the past year. However, ongoing improvements in the labour market and favourable demographics are expected to lead to a rebound in household formation, boosting residential construction in 2015-16. Meanwhile, in response to increased confidence and rising demand, business investment is growing more rapidly.
 
As growth becomes self-sustaining, the output gap narrows and inflation pressures firm, the US economy is expected to gradually become less reliant on accommodative monetary policy.
 
In contrast to the situation in the United States, the recoveries in the euro area and Japan remain fragile as deleveraging, underlying structural deficiencies and labour market challenges continue to restrain growth. Employment in both regions has yet to return to pre-crisis levels. Credit growth in the private sector continues to decline in the euro area and remains relatively low in Japan.
 
The recovery in the euro area stalled in the second quarter of 2014. Substantial excess supply, slowing growth and persistently low inflation have led to a fall in inflation expectations, representing a significant downside risk to the modest recovery in the region.
 
Over the next two years, real GDP growth in the euro area is expected to average roughly 1 per cent. The recovery will be supported by rising world demand, the ECB's recently announced policies, a relatively weak currency and ongoing structural reforms.
 
In Japan, growth fell sharply in the second quarter of this year. While a decline was anticipated in the wake of an increase in its value-added tax in April, subsequent data suggest that the Japanese economy remains weaker than previously expected. Despite considerable monetary accommodation, growth is expected to remain modest through 2016, as consumption demand continues to be restrained by weak real disposable household incomes and another VAT increase planned for 2015. The depreciation of the yen is anticipated to lead to higher demand for domestically produced goods and an eventual improvement in Japan's external accounts.
 
Following a particularly weak first quarter, growth in China picked up strongly in the second and third quarters, largely because of an improvement in net exports. The Bank expects real GDP growth in China to average around 7 per cent over 2014-16, supported by broadly accommodative monetary policy, targeted fiscal measures as authorities work to rebalance the economy, and lower oil prices. However, activity in China's housing market continues to decelerate, with high and rising inventories and declining prices and sales.
 
Growth profiles have diverged across other major emerging-market economies. India and Indonesia are benefiting from successful political transitions, and structural reforms in Mexico are fostering robust growth. In contrast, the economies of Brazil, Russia and Turkey are much weaker, partly as a result of political or geopolitical tensions.
 
The Bank projects that growth in EMEs will strengthen gradually through 2016 as financial conditions remain supportive and as several countries complete political transitions. Reform-oriented governments are expected to implement structural changes that will remove impediments and encourage growth.
 
Despite rising geopolitical tensions, global crude oil prices have fallen since the July Report and are now at their lowest level in about four years. The Bank estimates that about two-thirds of the decline is likely due to increased supply, particularly from Libya and from US shale oil production, with the remainder coming from weaker actual and anticipated global demand. The price of Western Canada Select has declined by less than that of global crude, reflecting an increase in the capacity to transport oil out of Western Canada by rail and solid demand for heavy oil.
 
By convention, the Bank assumes that energy prices will remain near their recent levels. The US-dollar prices for Brent, West Texas Intermediate and WCS have recently averaged roughly $90, $85 and $70 per barrel, respectively. These prices are $15 to $20 lower than had been assumed in the July Report.
 
The outlook for oil is subject to considerable two-sided risks. The prospect of price competition among some major producers poses a downside risk. That being said, the fiscal break-even oil price for OPEC members and high marginal supply costs for unconventional oil should provide a medium-term price floor of around $75 to $80 for Brent.  Despite the sharp fall in the spot price, the longer end of the futures curve has remained firm since the conflict in Iraq began in early June, reflecting market participants' concerns that events in Iraq could have a negative effect on supply over the longer term.
 
Prices of non-energy commodities have softened since the July Report. Agricultural prices are lower as a result of a record grain harvest and the smaller-than-expected impact on pork supplies of a virus affecting piglets. Beef prices, however, remain elevated. Base metals prices have fallen by about 6 per cent since the July Report, owing to concerns about prospects for demand from China. Nevertheless, the prices of non-energy commodities remain roughly in line with levels at the beginning of the year, since increases in base metals and livestock prices (due to supply-side constraints) have been offset by a decline in lumber prices.
 
Non-energy commodity prices are expected to ease even further through early 2015 as a steady decline in the prices of agricultural products more than offsets an anticipated increase in prices for lumber and base metals. Prices should begin to recover later on as the global economy gains strength.
 
Relative to the July Report, the profile for the Bank of Canada's commodity price index has fallen by more than 10 per cent. Prices for energy and non-energy commodities are now lower by about 15 per cent and 5 per cent, respectively.
 
While the global outlook has been downgraded, growth is expected to gain momentum, in part because of solid growth in private sector demand in the United States. Canada should benefit from the growing strength of its major trading partner. However, commodity prices have retreated considerably since the July Report. As a result, Canada's terms of trade have also declined and are now projected to be about 6 per cent lower through 2015 and 2016 than was anticipated at the time of the July Report.
 
The Canadian dollar has depreciated since the July Report. By convention, the Canadian dollar is assumed to remain at its recent average level of 89 cents over the projection horizon, lower than the 93 cents assumed in July.
 
Inflation in Canada is close to the 2 per cent target. Core inflation rose more rapidly than anticipated in July, mainly reflecting unexpected sector-specific factors. Meanwhile, total CPI inflation is evolving broadly as anticipated, as the pickup in core inflation was largely offset by lower-than-expected energy prices. The Bank continues to judge that underlying inflationary pressures are muted, given the persistent slack in the economy and the continued effects of competition in the retail sector.
 
Economic activity in Canada is currently supported by the lower Canadian dollar and the ongoing low interest rates, which are continuing to help offset headwinds that include the impact of uncertainty and weak global demand. Household spending still represents more than its long-run sustainable share of growth, and a rotation away from household spending toward business investment and exports is essential. Exports have been gaining traction, in line with the growing momentum in the US economy, but investment remains weak.
 
Over time, as global headwinds recede, confidence in the sustainability of domestic and global demand should gradually improve, and the contribution of business investment should pick up. Together with a moderation in the growth of household spending, this is expected to gradually return Canada's economy to a more balanced growth path.
 
Real GDP growth is projected to average close to 2 1/2 per cent over the next year before slowing gradually to around 2 per cent by the end of 2016, roughly the estimated growth rate of potential output. The outlook for growth in Canada is about the same as in July, with the impacts of various global developments largely offsetting one another. The strengthening US economy and weaker Canadian dollar are providing support for Canada's non-energy exports. However, the lower level of global crude oil prices and the resulting weaker terms of trade are projected to reduce Canadian incomes and to weigh on household and business spending.
 
As the economy reaches its full capacity in the second half of 2016, both core and total CPI inflation are projected to be about 2 per cent on a sustained basis.
 
Both core and total CPI inflation are now close to 2 per cent. A significant portion of the rise in inflation since the beginning of the year reflects the temporary effects of exchange rate pass-through and other sector-specific factors.
 
The depreciation of the Canadian dollar since the beginning of 2013 has put some temporary upward pressure on inflation as higher import prices have been "passed through" to domestic consumer prices. The magnitude and timing of the direct impact of the exchange rate on core inflation are difficult to measure with precision. The impact varies across businesses and depends on a number of factors, including the state of competition in individual sectors, the degree of import concentration and the duration of currency hedges. The pass-through can be inferred by examining the evolution of inflation for goods with high import content. Since the beginning of the year, core goods with higher import content - particularly clothing - have registered larger price increases than those with lower import content. The depreciation of the Canadian dollar appears to be adding about 0.1 to 0.3 percentage points to core inflation at this point. Since some of the key volatile components excluded from the core measure are more sensitive to exchange rate movements, the pass-through to total CPI inflation is estimated to be larger, at about 0.3 to 0.5 percentage points.  In the Bank's base-case projection, the direct effect of the lower dollar on the level of prices is assumed to be largely complete by around mid-2015. As a result, the impact on year-over-year inflation should dissipate by mid-2016.
 
Sector-specific factors continue to provide temporary boosts to measured inflation. Driven by telephone and Internet services, prices for communications registered one of the largest monthly gains on record in August. On a year-over-year basis, prices were up 8.9 per cent in September, the highest rate of increase since the early 1980s. Meat prices rose 11.5 per cent year-over-year in September, the highest rate since mid-1987. Increases in meat prices are expected to moderate, since prices have risen by more than would be consistent with the typical pass-through from commodity prices, and hog prices have recently retreated somewhat. More generally, above-average inflation since the beginning of the year has been concentrated in categories that tend to exhibit low inflation persistence - hence, inflation rates in these categories are expected to decrease in the near term.
 
Looking through these temporary effects, persistent excess capacity in the economy and heightened competition in the retail sector are continuing to exert downward pressure on inflation. The Bank estimates that, together, these two factors are currently subtracting about half a percentage point from the annual rate of core inflation.
 
Alternative measures of core inflation have generally picked up since the beginning of the year. The common component, which is well suited to seeing through one-off isolated price increases, has remained close to 1 1/2 per cent.
 
Canadian economic activity in the first half of the year has evolved broadly as anticipated. Stronger-than-expected growth in the second quarter of 2014 was partly offset by a downward revision to first-quarter growth. Growth was boosted by the dissipation of temporary factors that had depressed activity earlier in the year and was underpinned by a surge in non-energy exports and solid household spending. In contrast, business investment contracted for the third consecutive quarter. Real GDP in the third quarter is estimated to have increased by about 2 1/4 per cent to approximately the level that was anticipated in the July Report.
 
There is considerable uncertainty around estimates of economic slack. While almost all indicators that the Bank monitors continue to point to excess capacity, they differ widely in the signals they provide on the magnitude of current slack. The Bank uses three main approaches to assess overall production-based capacity pressures in the economy: the conventional measure, the integrated framework and the Business Outlook Survey. The conventional measure suggests that there is currently a modest degree of slack in the economy, which reappeared after growth slowed in mid-2011. In contrast, the integrated framework, which incorporates demographic details as well as macroeconomic data, suggests that excess capacity has fluctuated between 1 per cent and 2 per cent for more than three years. Finally, responses to the Business Outlook Survey are interpreted to be consistent with persistent excess capacity since mid-2012. As firms have been waiting for signs of a sustained strengthening in demand before expanding capacity, they have reported aligning operating capacity to weak market conditions and relying more heavily on existing capacity to meet fluctuations in demand.
 
Another way of assessing the slack in the economy is to separately examine unused capacity in the two main factors of production, i.e., labour input and capital. In general, labour market indicators point to a larger degree of slack than production-based measures. Using the integrated framework, we estimate, for example, that the labour input gap is currently around -1 3/4 per cent.
 
While the unemployment rate declined quite rapidly from late 2009 to late 2011, to about 7 per cent, and has remained fairly stable since then, it likely overstates the post-recession improvement in the labour market and the current degree of utilization of resources. For one thing, the participation rate has fallen markedly in the past year - by roughly double what demographic shifts would suggest. Notwithstanding the recent pickup in employment, total hours worked are essentially flat, and the share of full-time employment has been trending down. As well, the elevated proportion of involuntary part-time workers (roughly 930,000 workers on average over the past year), the average duration of unemployment, and weak growth in unit labour costs all point to the persistence of significant excess supply. A more comprehensive labour market indicator estimated by the Bank also suggests that the unemployment rate may have overstated the extent of improvements in labour markets.
 
There is less evidence of excess productive capital in the Canadian economy in the wake of a decade-long period of structural adjustment to competitiveness challenges punctuated by a global economic recession. Over this extended period, the capital stock in Canada benefited from strong investment in the mining, oil and gas sector but also faced contractionary forces as some capacity in other sectors was permanently withdrawn from production, and there was limited investment in new capacity. Faced with ongoing uncertainty about the outlook for global economic growth, firms have generally been reluctant to invest to expand capacity, focusing instead on investments to improve competitiveness or to repair existing capital stock. As a result, capacity utilization has increased and is currently close to its historical average.
 
Taking into account the various indicators of capacity pressures and the uncertainty surrounding any point estimate, the Bank judges that the amount of excess capacity in the third quarter was between 1/2 and 1 1/2 per cent.
 
The level of economic activity and the corresponding degree of slack are influenced by many factors, including the stance of monetary policy. In particular, the difference between the current policy rate and the neutral rate is an important determinant of the degree of support that policy is providing to economic activity.
 
With policy rates currently well below their estimated neutral levels in Canada and the United States, monetary policy in both countries remains highly stimulative. This stimulus is needed to offset the considerable headwinds faced by both countries. The Bank estimates that if the policy rate had been at its neutral level in both Canada and the United States since late 2010 and the Federal Reserve had not embarked on quantitative easing, the output gap in Canada would have been -5 1/2 per cent in the third quarter of this year. With so much excess capacity in the economy, core inflation would have fallen to well below 1 per cent. Housing and durables consumption, including auto sales, have benefited the most from this policy stimulus, with the latter estimated to be about 280,000 vehicles higher in 2014 than if the policy rate were at neutral in Canada and the United States. Canadian exports have also benefited indirectly through the impact of lower US interest rates on US consumption and investment spending.
 
The Bank's estimate of the neutral rate is subject to considerable uncertainty. A neutral rate different than the one currently assumed by the Bank would affect the outlook for economic activity and inflation. A lower level for the neutral rate would imply less policy stimulus than currently assumed and a risk of inflation not returning to target on a sustainable basis over the projection horizon. Symmetrically, a higher neutral rate would risk an overshoot of the target.
 
Canadian exports surged in the second quarter, supported by stronger US investment spending and the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar. Recent data point to a further gain in exports in the third quarter.
 
The pickup in exports has been fairly broad-based across sectors, with additional gains in energy and solid growth in exports of non-energy goods. Part of the growth in non-energy components (e.g., passenger cars and light trucks, motor vehicle parts, and intermediate food products) reflects a rebound from a very weak first quarter. However, there is now evidence of more sustained growth in several other components, including machinery and equipment, fabricated metal products, and building and packaging materials.
 
The Bank expects export growth to continue as foreign activity strengthens and the competitiveness of Canadian firms benefits from a lower Canadian dollar. The level of exports is higher than projected in July, consistent with the increased levels observed recently and the higher projected level for US activity through next year. This view is also supported by the results of the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey, which indicate that exporters have seen more tangible signs of improving sales growth and are anticipating an acceleration of foreign sales. Nevertheless, the export profile is still much weaker than in previous cycles, and downside risks remain.
 
To a large extent, the export profile reflects the weakness of the global recovery. But, as the Bank emphasized in previous Reports, it also reflects competitiveness challenges and structural issues. Recent staff analysis using highly disaggregated export data has shed additional light on these issues. It suggests that capacity in a number of sectors has declined significantly since 2000. Within the broad export categories identified as underperforming relative to others (16 of the 31 non-energy export categories), about one-quarter of the subsectors (about 500 out of 2,000) have registered export declines of more than 75 per cent since 2000. More than one-third of this decrease is accounted for by a decline in exports of heavy trucks. Other subsectors with notable declines include rail locomotives, wooden furniture, knitted fabrics, small passenger cars and kraftliner paper. Anecdotal evidence, including numerous media reports of production facility closures, suggests that those declines reflect structural or competitiveness issues, and therefore represent lost productive capacity.
 
When compared with a scenario in which exports of these products would have risen in line with foreign activity, there is a gap equivalent to about $30 billion (in real terms) by 2013, or a 7 per cent reduction in total non-energy exports in 2013. The weakness in these sectors can also explain almost 40 per cent of the poor performance of non-energy exports relative to foreign activity since 2000.
 
Business investment has been very weak recently. While an increasing number of export sectors appear to be turning the corner toward recovery, only when this pickup is perceived as sustainable will it translate into the higher business spending required to return the economy to sustainable, balanced growth. At the same time, there are downside risks related to the possibility of persistently weaker commodity prices, which could weigh on investment in the mining, oil and gas sector.
 
Other factors are generally positive for investment spending: corporate balance sheets are healthy, and the terms and conditions for financing are very stimulative. In addition, as time passes there will be a natural increase in investment to repair and replenish aging capital stock. There is no evidence yet, however, of a pickup in firm creation.
 
Responses to the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey show that the balance of opinion on investment intentions has remained relatively high, but this is not expected to immediately translate into a large increase in investment growth. Although, on balance, firms are planning to invest in machinery and equipment, few are planning significant investments to enhance capacity in Canada. Analysis by Bank staff suggests that most sectors expected to lead the recovery in non-energy exports currently have sufficient excess capacity to meet demand. These sectors include manufacturers of intermediate metal products, fabricated metals, non-metallic mineral products, as well as other electronic and electrical machinery, equipment and parts. A notable exception is the wood products sector, which is currently operating at a capacity utilization rate well above its historical average.
 
Momentum in the housing market has increased since the July Report. Housing activity has been more robust than anticipated, buoyed by continued very low mortgage rates and exhibiting strength beyond a rebound from weather-depressed levels earlier in the year.
 
Housing starts have remained broadly in line with demographic demand in recent months. However, sales of existing homes have picked up noticeably since the beginning of the year, to a four-year high. This is contributing to sizable increases in house prices, although the national picture continues to mask important regional divergences. In general, with historically low price increases and sales volumes, markets in Eastern Canada appear to show signs consistent with a soft landing. This contrasts with major cities in Ontario, Alberta and British Columbia, where housing markets are generally robust and much tighter.
 
While a good part of the strength can be explained by favourable demographics and strong employment gains in parts of the country, it nonetheless suggests that household imbalances could increase further.
 
Consumer spending has also shown some renewed vigour recently, with car sales in particular reaching record highs. The strength in both housing and consumption has led to an uptick in the growth of household credit.
 
The Bank continues to expect that the share of residential investment in the economy will decline to a more sustainable level over the projection period. The declines in commodity prices and the terms of trade are expected to weigh on household income and contribute to a modest slowing in household spending. Consequently, the savings rate should remain close to recent levels. The ratio of household debt to disposable income is expected to edge higher from its current elevated level before stabilizing by 2016.
 
However, this outlook for housing and the household sector depends on other aspects of the projection, such as a more robust global economy, stronger growth of Canadian exports and investment, and the beginning of a normalization of global market interest rates.
 
Real GDP growth is projected to average close to 2 1/2 per cent over the next year before slowing gradually to around 2 per cent by the end of 2016, roughly the estimated growth rate of potential output. While the lower Canadian dollar will provide some offset, on net, the Bank estimates that the weaker profile for the terms of trade in this projection compared with July will curb GDP growth by approximately 1/4 of a percentage point in 2015 through a combination of weaker spending by households and businesses.
 
The Bank expects that the economy will gradually return to its full production capacity in the second half of 2016. Given the degree of uncertainty inherent in projections, the Bank judges that GDP growth will likely be within ±0.5 percentage points of the base-case projection in 2015, with a somewhat wider range in 2016.
 
The growth of potential output is projected to remain roughly stable over the 2014-17 period. While demographic factors, mainly the aging population, result in a moderation in the growth rate of trend labour input, the impact on potential growth is projected to be largely offset by a modest improvement in the growth of trend labour productivity associated with the expected firming in business investment growth.
 
Core inflation is expected to remain around 2 per cent over the projection horizon. The depreciation of the Canadian dollar over the past two years or so and the effects of sector-specific shocks are expected to continue to put upward pressure on year-over-year inflation until about mid-2016. Offsetting these effects, excess capacity in the economy and the effects of competition in the retail sector are anticipated to continue to exert downward pressure on core inflation, although at a diminishing rate. It is difficult to be precise about the size of the competition effects on the CPI and the timing of their dissipation. In the second half of 2016, when the economy is forecast to reach and remain at full capacity, inflation is expected to be about 2 per cent on a sustained basis.
 
As discussed earlier, there is considerable uncertainty regarding the degree of slack in the economy, including uncertainty related to the dynamics of the labour gap relative to the output gap. Therefore, there is uncertainty about how long it will take for the economy to reach full potential and for inflation to return sustainably to target. For example, using the lower end of the range for the output gap in the third quarter (-1 1/2 per cent), the Bank estimates that core inflation would decline to about 1 1/2 per cent in the second half of 2015, or 0.2 percentage points lower than in the base-case projection, assuming no monetary policy response. Inflation would also take approximately three quarters longer to return sustainably to target. Conversely, a starting-point output gap of -1/2 per cent would push inflation about 0.2 percentage points above the base-case projection in 2015.
 
Total CPI inflation is forecast to remain close to 2 per cent in the near term and to decline to about 1 1/2 per cent in mid-2015, mainly in response to the recent fall in energy prices. Total CPI inflation is then expected to rise gradually and to return to target in the second half of 2016. As always, the profile for total CPI inflation can vary importantly, depending on movements in volatile energy components. For example, if the base-case scenario assumed that oil prices were 10 per cent higher , total CPI inflation would be higher by 0.3 percentage points over the coming year.
 
Inflation expectations remain well anchored: the October Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation was 2.0 per cent in 2014 and 1.9 per cent in 2015. The results of the autumn Business Outlook Survey suggest that the vast majority of firms still expect inflation over the next two years to be within the 1 to 3 per cent range, with the central tendency slightly below 2 per cent.
 
Based on the past dispersion of private sector forecasts, a reasonable range around the base-case projection for total CPI inflation is ±0.3 percentage points. This range is intended to convey a sense of forecast uncertainty. Fan charts, which are derived using statistical analysis of the Bank's forecast errors, provide a complementary perspective.  Chart 29 and Chart 30 show the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation, respectively, from the fourth quarter of 2014 to the end of 2016.
 
The outlook for inflation is subject to several risks emanating from both the external environment and the domestic economy. The Bank judges that the risks to the projected inflation path are roughly balanced.
 
The most important risks to inflation are the following:
 
Stronger-than-expected private demand in the United States is the most important upside risk to inflation in Canada. With healthy corporate balance sheets and good profitability, a rekindling of animal spirits could lead businesses to increase hiring and investment by more than expected. These improvements would boost confidence and lead to stronger labour income, supporting household spending and economic activity more generally. More robust US activity, in turn, would generate positive spillovers to growth in the rest of the world and to commodity prices. Canadian exports would benefit from firmer global demand. Higher commodity prices would benefit commodity producers and provide a further boost to Canadian private spending through stronger terms of trade and income.
 
There is a risk that global economic growth could once again disappoint, remaining below potential over 2015-16. There are a number of possible triggers for this risk, including the realization of secular stagnation, a housing-induced slowdown and financial stress in China, and a geopolitical event that impairs global confidence. If any one of these risks were to materialize, it would weigh on US and Canadian economic growth through trade, financial and confidence channels, reducing external demand for Canadian exports and lowering Canada's terms of trade.
 
Global oil prices have fallen sharply since the July Report, reflecting concerns about global demand as well as important supply-side developments. There is a risk that oil prices could fall further, especially if global growth prospects continue to weaken. While lower oil prices would benefit consumers, their effect on Canada would, on balance, be negative, reducing Canada's terms of trade and domestic income. Persistently lower-than-assumed oil prices could also have a material impact on investment and activity in the oil sector and the associated manufacturing supply chain.
 
Recent data suggest that a broad-based pickup in exports is under way, in line with a continued strengthening of the US economy and the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar. However, for a given global outlook, there remains a risk that exports could disappoint. Recent Bank analysis suggests that production capacity in a number of export sectors has declined significantly since 2000 as companies have closed their facilities in Canada and relocated. Reduced capacity could limit the extent to which non-energy exports continue to benefit from stronger external demand over the medium term. At the same time, business investment growth has yet to mirror the pickup in exports. While the Bank continues to expect investment to gain momentum as economic uncertainty dissipates, the realization of a downside risk to exports would also jeopardize the recovery in investment growth. Together, weaker exports and business investment would pose a downside risk to inflation.
 
Household spending has shown signs of renewed vigour in recent months. While a soft landing in the housing market remains the most likely scenario, near-record-high house prices and debt levels relative to income leave households vulnerable to adverse shocks. Continued strength in housing and consumption would provide a near-term boost to economic activity, but would also further exacerbate existing imbalances in the household sector and increase the likelihood and potential severity of a correction later on. A disorderly unwinding of these imbalances, should it materialize, could have sizable negative effects on other parts of the economy and on inflation.