Global economic growth is expected to strengthen over the next two years, led by stronger momentum in the United States. In contrast, in the euro area, GDP growth will be modest as further private deleveraging and high unemployment continue to weigh on domestic demand. In Japan, exceptional monetary policy stimulus is projected to sustain the ongoing recovery, despite scheduled increases in the value-added tax.
 
China's real GDP is anticipated to grow at a more moderate, though still solid, pace over the projection horizon, with a gradual rebalancing toward consumption and away from investment and exports. Economic activity in other emerging-market economies is projected to pick up, owing to a normalization of financial conditions, more robust growth in foreign demand and further progress on economic reforms.
 
While global trade growth has plunged since 2011, a recovery is expected over the projection horizon, supported by growing international demand. At the same time, the improvement in world economic activity should help to sustain the elevated level of commodity prices. Overall, global economic growth is expected to rise from 2.9 per cent in 2013 to 3.4 per cent in 2014 and 3.7 per cent in 2015.
 
Financial conditions in the advanced economies remain highly supportive of economic growth. The decision by the US. Federal Open Market Committee to taper its asset purchases was well received in financial markets, compared with the outsized response in May 2013 to the initial indication that asset purchases might be reduced. Reflecting expectations of stronger growth, especially in the United States, yields on long-term government bonds in many advanced economies have increased, and risky assets have performed well. Financial conditions in some EMEs remain challenging, however, particularly in those economies with weak fundamentals. As US monetary policy is normalized, there may be some overshooting in global bond yields, which would lead to tighter global financial conditions and slower global growth.
 
Inflation remains below target in most advanced economies, dampened by significant excess capacity. As economic slack is reduced and labour markets firm, inflation rates in these economies are projected to move up gradually.
 
US economic growth in the second half of 2013 is estimated to have rebounded to more than 3.5 per cent, on average, notwithstanding the adverse effects of fiscal consolidation, higher long-term interest rates, and the added uncertainty caused by a temporary government shutdown and the debt-ceiling standoff. There has since been an improvement in both household and business confidence, owing to the resolution of these fiscal issues and the stronger economic outlook. While the anticipated cumulative drag on growth from fiscal policy over the next two years is largely unchanged relative to previous expectations, under the new agreement, it will be spread more evenly. Fiscal drag is now projected to decline from 1.7 percentage points in 2013 to 0.5 percentage points in 2014 and 0.3 percentage points in 2015.
 
Given the improvement in economic conditions, the US. FOMC has begun to reduce the pace of its monthly asset purchases, with further reductions conditional on the outlook for labour market conditions and inflation. Monetary policy is expected to remain highly accommodative, however, and US financial conditions are very stimulative. Based on the FOMC's recently revised forward guidance, policy interest rates are likely to remain at the current low levels well after the unemployment rate has declined below 6 1/2 per cent - especially if projected inflation remains under the 2 per cent target. Equity prices have reached record levels, and yields on corporate bonds are low, leading to robust issuance.
 
A projected broad-based acceleration in US private demand over 2014-15 is expected to create a virtuous circle of self-sustaining growth. Growth in consumption is expected to pick up, supported by strengthening labour market conditions, continued increases in household wealth and improved access to credit. Even with higher mortgage interest rates, the recovery in the housing sector is projected to continue at a solid pace as bank lending conditions are eased, household formation rebounds and the stock of homes in foreclosure declines. In addition, the growth of business investment is anticipated to increase, given improving economic conditions and less uncertainty about fiscal policy. A robust rise in exports will likely be more than offset by an increase in non-oil imports, with net exports making a slightly negative contribution to real GDP growth over the projection horizon.
 
Overall, US real GDP growth is expected to rise from 1.9 per cent in 2013 to 3.0 per cent in 2014 and 3.2 per cent in 2015. This growth profile is stronger than anticipated in the October Report, reflecting broad-based strength in US private demand. Based on the past dispersion of private sector forecasts, US economic growth in 2014 would be expected to fall within ± 0.5 percentage points of the Bank's projection, with a somewhat wider range in 2015. There is a risk, however, that US economic growth could surprise further on the upside if businesses increased investment spending more rapidly than projected in response to reduced policy uncertainty and a rekindling of "animal spirits." Such a scenario would have broad positive spillover effects on the global economy.
 
Inflation has been trending lower over the past two years in many advanced economies, in some cases falling well below target levels. This generalized weakness likely reflects common international factors, such as reductions in global food and energy prices, as well as the impact from still sizable negative output gaps and high unemployment.
 
The downward trend of inflation in the advanced economies is expected to reverse over the projection horizon. In the United States, strengthening growth is expected to reduce economic slack and move inflation closer to the 2 per cent target toward the end of 2015. In Japan, core inflation has become positive for the first time in five years in response to aggressive monetary policy stimulus. It is expected to rise further over the projection horizon, with an anticipated increase in wages contributing importantly to this movement. Given the muted recovery in the euro area, the output gap will remain sizable, and the rise in inflation is expected to be limited.
 
Compared with the advanced economies, inflation remains relatively high in many EMEs, driven in part by exchange rate depreciations that have pushed up import prices. The recent tightening in monetary policy in some EMEs, combined with structural reforms that will help to relieve supply constraints, is projected to lead to a reduction in inflation in these economies.
 
Commodity prices, as measured by the Bank of Canada's commodity price index , are elevated. High commodity prices continue to reflect the growing importance of China and other EMEs. In particular, China's solid growth outlook and the size of its economy mean that the demand for commodities should continue to be robust. Moreover, ongoing urbanization and an expanding middle class in China and other EMEs are expected to support commodity prices over the medium term.
 
The BCPI is projected to stay relatively flat through 2014-15, in light of roughly offsetting movements in the prices of energy and non-energy commodities. Based on the latest futures curves, crude oil prices will decline over the projection horizon, reflecting higher production, especially in North America, and a gradual easing of geopolitical concerns. In contrast, non-energy commodity prices are expected to grow solidly over the next two years. Lumber prices are anticipated to increase, supported by the ongoing recovery in the US housing sector, while base metals prices are projected to rise in response to stronger global demand.
 
The anticipated upturn in advanced and emerging-market economies, led by the United States, is expected to result in an improved performance for Canada's exports. Robust global demand for commodities is projected to sustain the elevated level of investment in the resource sector in Canada and to support Canadian income levels.
 
The Canadian dollar has recently fallen to around 91 cents US, compared with the 97 cents US assumed in the October Report. This depreciation likely reflects the improved growth prospects in the United States, as well as reduced safe-haven effects that had pushed the Canadian dollar higher in the aftermath of the global financial crisis. By convention, the Canadian dollar is assumed to remain at or near its current level over the projection horizon.
 
Inflation has moved further below the 2 per cent target in recent months. The downward pressure on prices principally reflects a significant amount of excess supply in the economy and heightened competition in the retail sector. The effects of these factors appear to be greater than had been anticipated. At the same time, Canada's economic growth strengthened in the second half of 2013, and prospects have improved somewhat relative to the October Report, given expectations of firmer growth in US demand.
 
While as yet there are no signs of a rebalancing toward exports and business investment, the strengthening of the global economy and recent depreciation of the Canadian dollar should foster a broadening of the composition of growth in Canada. As excess capacity is gradually absorbed and the effects of competition wane, the Bank expects that inflation will return to 2 per cent in about two years, although the profile of inflation is now lower than projected in October.
 
The Canadian economy is continuing to adjust to the aftermath of the global financial crisis and the ensuing recession, as well as to significantly higher global prices for Canada's commodity exports compared with the 1990s average. These large and persistent forces have had important sectoral and regional effects, and will continue to influence the composition of exports and business investment in coming years.
 
Real GDP growth is estimated to have risen somewhat above the growth rate of potential output in the second half of 2013. However, the shift in the composition of aggregate demand necessary for sustainable growth has not yet occurred. The moderate growth trend in consumer spending remained supportive of overall growth, while residential investment failed to slow to the extent anticipated. At the same time, non-commodity exports continued to disappoint, and business investment recovered more slowly than expected.
 
Excess capacity in the economy remains significant. Taking into account the various indicators of capacity pressures and the uncertainty surrounding any point estimates, the Bank judges that the amount of excess supply in the fourth quarter of 2013 was between 3/4 per cent and 1 3/4 per cent, slightly less than estimated in the October Report.
 
Real GDP growth is projected to rise from 1.8 per cent in 2013 to 2.5 per cent on an average annual basis in both 2014 and 2015, underpinned by the ongoing firming in the US economy, which will lead to more broadly based growth in global demand. Given the degree of uncertainty inherent in projections, the Bank judges that GDP growth will likely be within ± 0.5 percentage points of the base-case projection in 2014, with a somewhat wider range in 2015.
 
With foreign demand expected to strengthen, the Bank's best judgment is that net exports will return to making a positive contribution to overall growth at the beginning of 2014. Total exports are projected to increase at a moderately stronger pace than expected in the October Report. Growth in all three major export groupings - energy-related commodities, non-energy commodities and non-commodities - is expected to pick up, although commodity exports will contribute the most to growth in GDP. The stronger performance in the trade sector should be supported by the depreciation of the Canadian dollar in recent months.  Sustained growth in exports should stimulate improvements in business confidence and lead to a more solid contribution from business fixed investment over time. Imports should also strengthen, given supply-chain linkages in the foreign trade sector and the high import content of business investment, particularly investment in machinery and equipment.
 
The economy will continue to be supported by moderate growth in consumer spending, while the level of residential investment is expected to remain relatively unchanged, commensurate with a convergence toward a more sustainable level of activity. Overall, recent developments are consistent with some degree of consumer caution and a soft landing of the housing market. Housing starts moderated in 2013 compared with 2012, particularly in regions that are not benefiting directly from the energy sector and related interprovincial migration. In the anticipation of higher mortgage rates, there was some pulling forward of house purchases over the summer. As expected, this uptick was temporary, and sales of existing homes have since slowed to a level close to their historical average. House price growth also moderated in 2013 relative to 2012. Overall credit growth has firmed in recent months, largely reflecting the pickup in resale activity earlier in the year, but remains consistent with the Bank's view that the ratio of household debt to disposable income will stabilize over the projection horizon.
 
With the projected profile for the growth of real GDP exceeding the growth of potential output, the Bank expects that the economy will gradually return to its full production capacity over the next two years.
 
Non-commodity exports have remained disappointingly weak in recent quarters, despite the strengthening US economy over this period. Ongoing competitiveness challenges, including competition in the US market from emerging-market economies such as China and Mexico, may have played a greater role than previously estimated. Restructuring in global supply chains is affecting global trade patterns and may also have contributed to the weakness in exports. Ongoing adjustments to the terms of trade mean that commodity and non-commodity exports will continue to grow at different rates over the projection horizon.
 
The non-commodity sector is expected to benefit from a US-led strengthening in foreign demand, which appears more firmly entrenched than in October. A key assumption underlying the base-case projection is that growth in the non-commodity sector will pick up gradually over the next two years, but will remain slower than the pace of growth of foreign demand. While this assumption is prudent, there is a risk that the recovery in non-commodity exports may take even longer than anticipated, given ongoing competitiveness challenges and potential supply constraints.
 
Energy exports have been hampered during the past year by temporary production shutdowns and transportation bottlenecks. Growth in energy exports is expected to strengthen in 2014, reflecting announced plans by major producers to increase output, the growing use of Canadian heavy oil in US refineries and further growth in rail capacity. Exports of non-energy commodities, such as lumber products, are also expected to strengthen.
 
As uncertainty about the outlook dissipates, competitiveness pressures to improve productivity and the need to expand capacity to meet sustained increases in foreign demand are expected to lead to stronger business investment. This should be the case particularly for investment in machinery and equipment, which has been held back by cyclical factors as well as adjustments of the manufacturing sector to the effects of the relatively high terms of trade. These incentives to invest will add to those stemming from the steady growth in domestic demand.
 
Financial conditions in Canada remain supportive of investment, with strong investor demand reflected in relatively narrow corporate bond spreads and buoyant equity prices, suggesting confidence in the future profitability of the corporate sector. Responses to the Bank's latest Senior Loan Officer Survey and Business Outlook Survey also indicate that credit conditions remain favourable. Moreover, business credit growth remains above its historical average, although it has slowed somewhat in recent months. Canadian firms should also be more inclined to invest, since the lower value of the Canadian dollar is boosting both activity and profitability in the export sector.
 
There are some encouraging signs that confidence is gradually building. Firms surveyed for the Bank's latest Business Outlook Survey point to improvements in the US economic outlook and foreign orders and to the benefits of their recent investments in bolstering their ability to export. Intentions to invest in machinery and equipment have increased for the first time since the fourth quarter of 2012, although firms also report that investments are still depressed by uncertainty, notably with respect to domestic demand. The results of the latest survey conducted by Export Development Canada show that for the first time since the spring of 2011, the balance of opinion regarding global economic conditions is positive, and that firms are more optimistic about international business opportunities.
 
Inflation has continued to surprise on the downside in recent months, with core inflation at 1.1 per cent in November and total CPI inflation at 0.9 per cent. Alternative measures of core inflation have all fallen since the second half of 2012, with most currently at or slightly above 1 per cent. Persistently weak inflation is not unique to Canada, but is also being observed in other advanced economies.
 
There are several factors underlying the broad-based weakness in inflation in Canada. The significant and persistent slack in the Canadian economy has contributed to a marked increase since mid-2012 in the proportion of core consumer goods and services for which prices are increasing by less than 2 per cent. Heightened competition in the retail sector is also contributing to the weakness in inflation. This has been reflected in the unusual softness in the prices for core food items and non-durable goods, two sectors where anecdotal evidence suggests that competition is most intense. Moreover, there is a possibility that a given amount of excess supply is having a larger impact on inflation than had been anticipated.  This could be especially the case if excess supply has persisted for a long time. Given the high degree of uncertainty around real-time estimates of the output gap, it is also possible that the level of economic slack is greater than currently estimated.
 
Both core and total CPI inflation are projected to remain around 1 per cent in the first half of 2014 and to increase very gradually toward the target, as excess capacity is absorbed and the impact of increased competition dissipates. The depreciation of the Canadian dollar in the past year is also expected to exert some upward pressure on inflation. The lower profile for inflation relative to October mainly reflects the Bank's assessment that the effects of heightened competition on inflation will be more widespread and persistent than previously assumed. While increased competition will have a permanent effect on the level of prices, its impact on the rate of inflation will be transitory. The assumption in the Bank's base-case projection is that it will subtract around 0.3 percentage points from core inflation in 2014, with the effects largely dissipating by around the middle of 2015.
 
To the extent that the effects of increased retail competition have a transitory impact on inflation, they should not necessarily elicit a monetary policy response unless they induce a change in inflation expectations.
 
Indicators of inflation expectations are consistent with the Bank's projection. The January Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation was 1.5 per cent for 2014 and 1.9 per cent for 2015. According to the latest Business Outlook Survey, inflation expectations remain steady, with almost all firms expecting CPI inflation to be within the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range over the next two years, and with the majority expecting inflation to remain in the bottom half of that range. Market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations continue to be consistent with the 2 per cent inflation-control target.
 
Based on the past dispersion of private sector forecasts, a reasonable range around the base-case projection for total inflation in 2014 is ± 0.3 percentage points.  This range is intended to measure ex ante forecast uncertainty. Fan charts, which are derived using statistical analysis of ex post errors from the Bank's projection models, provide a complementary perspective. Chart 19 and Chart 20 show the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the first quarter of 2014 to the end of 2015. The degree of uncertainty around the inflation forecast, and the range of weaker-than-projected outcomes in particular, are important considerations for policy in light of the low level of inflation and the recent series of downside surprises.
 
The outlook for inflation is subject to several risks emanating from both the external environment and the domestic economy. The Bank judges that the risks to the projected inflation path are roughly balanced.
 
The most important risks to inflation are:
 
The major upside risk to inflation in Canada is the possibility of stronger-than-expected growth in US private demand. Business investment in the United States has been subdued, in part reflecting the cautiousness of firms in a highly uncertain environment. As the economy strengthens and uncertainty dissipates, business sentiment should improve, and firms may not only increase investment, but they may also make up for the previous shortfall. This would boost economic activity and confidence more generally, leading to positive spillover effects throughout the US economy. It would also likely be accompanied by higher US market interest rates and a stronger US dollar. Although this would put upward pressure on market interest rates in Canada, these effects would be more than offset by the increase in US real GDP. Stronger US demand would be transmitted to the Canadian economy through the trade channel and firmer commodity prices, as well as through reduced uncertainty and positive confidence effects.
 
Over the past two years, a significant wedge has emerged between the level of Canadian exports and that of foreign demand. While prospects for the global economy have improved and the Canadian dollar has depreciated in the past year, the base-case projection is conservative in assuming that only a small portion of this wedge will dissipate over the next two years. However, with the performance of exports still disappointing, there is a risk that the growth rate of exports will continue to fall below that of foreign activity in coming years. This could reflect more intense competitiveness pressures or an inability to respond rapidly to increases in demand, given the reduced production capacity in some export sectors. A weaker recovery of exports would translate into slower growth in business investment. Together, weaker growth in both exports and business investment would pose a downside risk to inflation.
 
The evolution of the housing sector continues to support the Bank's soft-landing scenario. Housing starts are largely in line with demographic demand, and resale activity is close to its historical average. Households remain vulnerable to adverse economic shocks, however, given that household leverage remains elevated and the ratio of house prices to income is close to its all-time high. The risk of a disorderly unwinding of household sector imbalances, should it materialize, could have sizable spillover effects on other parts of the economy and on inflation.