The global economic recovery is entering a new phase. In advanced economies, temporary factors supporting growth in 2010 - such as the inventory cycle and pent-up demand - have largely run their course and fiscal stimulus will shift to fiscal consolidation over the projection horizon. While the Bank expects that private demand in advanced economies will become sufficiently entrenched to sustain the recovery, the combination of difficult labour market dynamics and ongoing deleveraging in many advanced economies is expected to moderate the pace of growth relative to prior expectations. These factors will contribute to a weaker-than-projected recovery in the United States in particular. Growth in emerging-market economies is expected to ease to a more sustainable pace as fiscal and monetary policies are tightened. Heightened tensions in currency markets and related risks associated with global imbalances could result in a more protracted and difficult global recovery.
 
The economic outlook for Canada has changed. The Bank expects the economic recovery to be more gradual than it had projected in its July Monetary Policy Report, with growth of 3.0 per cent in 2010, 2.3 per cent in 2011, and 2.6 per cent in 2012. This more modest growth profile reflects a more gradual global recovery and a more subdued profile for household spending. With housing activity declining markedly as anticipated and household debt considerations becoming more important, the Bank expects household expenditures to decelerate to a pace closer to the rate of income growth over the projection horizon. Overall, the composition of demand in Canada is expected to shift away from government and household expenditures towards business investment and net exports. The strength of net exports will be sensitive to currency movements, the expected recovery in productivity growth, and the prospects for external demand.
 
Inflation in Canada has been slightly below the Bank's July projection. The recent moderation in core inflation is consistent with the persistence of significant excess supply and a deceleration in the growth of unit labour costs. The Bank judges that the output gap is slightly larger and that the economy will return to full capacity by the end of 2012 rather than the beginning of that year, as had been anticipated in July. The inflation outlook has been revised down and both total CPI and core inflation are now expected to converge to 2 per cent by the end of 2012, as excess supply in the economy is gradually absorbed and inflation expectations remain well anchored.
 
Important risks remain around this outlook and the Bank judges that the risks to the inflation outlook are roughly balanced. The three main upside risks are higher commodity prices, a stronger-than-anticipated recovery in the US economy, and the possibility of greater-than-projected momentum in the Canadian household sector. These upside risks are balanced by three downside risks relating to Canada's international competitiveness, global growth prospects, and the possibility of a more pronounced correction in the Canadian housing market.
 
On 8 September 2010, the Bank raised its target for the overnight rate by one-quarter of one percentage point to 1 per cent. On 19 October 2010, the Bank maintained the target for the overnight rate at 1 per cent. The Bank Rate is correspondingly 1 1/4 per cent and the deposit rate is 3/4 per cent. This leaves considerable monetary stimulus in place, consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target in an environment of significant excess supply in Canada.
 
At this time of transition in the global recovery, with a weaker US outlook, constraints beginning to moderate growth in emerging-market economies, and domestic considerations that are expected to slow consumption and housing activity in Canada, any further reduction in monetary policy stimulus would need to be carefully considered.
 
The global recovery is entering a new phase. To date, global economic growth has been supported by massive and timely monetary and fiscal stimulus in advanced economies and sustained momentum in emerging markets. As fiscal stimulus is withdrawn around the world, private demand is projected to become sufficiently entrenched to sustain a modest recovery. However, the overall profile for global economic growth is weaker, reflecting the broad forces of household, bank and sovereign deleveraging. In the United States, households will need to continue to restrain their spending over a prolonged period in order to repair balance sheets and rebuild wealth. In peripheral European countries, the necessary fiscal adjustment has just begun. In this environment, monetary authorities in many advanced economies are likely to keep policy interest rates at historically low levels for an extended period and, in some cases, may introduce additional stimulus measures. Sustaining the global recovery will require a greater rotation of demand, supported by increased flexibility in exchange rates. At present, these adjustments are coming through divergent inflation pressures rather than currency movements, which could result in a more protracted and difficult recovery.
 
Recent developments highlight important geographic divergences in underlying economic growth. In the United States and Japan, the pace of the recovery has slowed, even as the momentum in most emerging-market economies remains strong. Growth has been firmer in Europe's core economies, but activity has weakened markedly in the peripheral countries. Underlying inflation pressures in the major advanced economies remain subdued, but are building in emerging-market countries.
 
Real GDP in the United States slowed to an annual growth rate of 1.7 per cent in the second quarter and is estimated to have increased by 2.3 per cent in the third quarter - in both instances, this is weaker than anticipated at the time of the July Monetary Policy Report.  Recent data suggest that underlying fundamentals for household spending have weakened over the past few months. The recovery in the labour market has been lacklustre, restraining the growth in labour income. In addition, household balance sheets are under pressure from elevated debt levels and the dramatic collapse in home prices, which has left a significant portion of mortgaged homeowners with negative equity. More positively, revised US national accounts data indicate that the personal savings rate rose more rapidly than previously estimated, to a level consistent with a gradual rebuilding of US household wealth towards historical averages. If savings rates remain near current levels (absent a further shock to confidence), consumption will grow at a rate close to income growth.
 
The US housing market has shown renewed weakness. Following the expiry of the tax credit for first-time homebuyers, housing sales have decreased markedly, suggesting softer underlying demand. High inventories of unsold houses (including foreclosures) are expected to restrain new construction and housing prices.
 
US business investment in structures also remains depressed, reflecting high vacancy rates. In contrast, growth in business investment in equipment and software continues to be strong, as firms strive to replace the capital that depreciated during the recession and to improve productivity.
 
Taken together, these developments suggest that the pace of the recovery in US private domestic demand will be more gradual than assumed in the July Report.
 
Real GDP growth in the euro area picked up sharply in the second quarter, reaching 3.9 per cent. However, recent indicators suggest a more moderate pace of growth in the third quarter. In the core economies, activity has picked up noticeably, led by strength in exports. Real GDP growth in the peripheral European countries, in contrast, has been weak and unemployment high. The measures taken by governments to improve fiscal sustainability have reduced concerns about a major debt crisis in Europe, but considerable structural adjustment remains to be implemented.
 
In Japan, real GDP growth slowed markedly to 1.5 per cent in the second quarter, and recent data point to weak growth in the third quarter. Measures to stimulate domestic demand appear to be having a slight positive effect, although unemployment remains relatively high. Japanese authorities have taken additional steps to stimulate growth and alleviate pressures on their currency, including further monetary and fiscal policy easing and the first intervention in foreign exchange markets in six years. A recently proposed fiscal stimulus program aims to boost domestic demand through consumption incentives, new infrastructure projects and employment support.
 
Real GDP growth in China remained strong at around 10 per cent in the second and third quarters. Although the effects of the fiscal stimulus introduced during the recession have begun to diminish and the measures to cool activity in the property market have started to take hold, growth in investment and consumption has remained robust. Net exports, in contrast, contributed only modestly to growth in GDP over this period, as both imports and exports rose rapidly.
 
The Bank of Canada's index of global commodity prices has declined by about 4 per cent since the release of the July Report. While crude oil prices are higher, natural gas prices have fallen significantly in response to weather-related factors and excess supply. Prices for non-energy commodities have increased by about 5 per cent over the same period, in some cases reaching recent highs. Strong demand by emerging-market economies and growing investor interest have supported metals prices, while weather-related factors have driven up the prices of agricultural products.
 
Overall, conditions in global financial markets are very stimulative. Borrowing rates are at or near record lows in a number of countries, and capital markets remain open to a broad range of financial and non-financial corporate issuers. With markets focused on the strength and durability of the global recovery, macro concerns have dominated idiosyncratic ones, leading to higher correlations across asset prices. Worries about the fiscal positions and banking sectors of some peripheral European countries remain, and a negative shock would risk triggering renewed strains in global financial markets. Heightened tensions in foreign exchange markets and risks related to growing global imbalances have become a key source of vulnerability.
 
Government bond yields in the major advanced economies have decreased noticeably since July. Markets expect that, as a result of reduced prospects for growth and inflation, policy interest rates will be maintained at very low levels over a longer period than previously assumed, and that some countries may resort to further unconventional measures to stimulate demand.
 
Global equity prices have risen since the July Report, while corporate bond spreads have tightened slightly. Investor demand for corporate bonds continues to be very strong, as illustrated by historically low corporate bond yields and record US-dollar high-yield bond issuance.
 
Bank lending conditions have moved in different directions across advanced economies. Surveys indicate that lending conditions in the United States and Japan eased somewhat in the second quarter of 2010 - a modest unwinding of the tightening that occurred over the previous two years. In contrast, banks in the euro area have tightened terms and conditions on business credit.
 
Emerging-market economies have experienced large capital inflows as investors search for higher yields. Policy-makers in a number of these countries have increasingly taken action to limit the impact of these inflows on their currencies and economies. By restricting capital movements, these actions could increase volatility in financial markets and heighten trade tensions.
 
The global economic recovery is expected to proceed at a more gradual pace than previously anticipated. Growth in the advanced economies is projected to slow over the coming year, reflecting the withdrawal of fiscal stimulus and modest growth in private demand, while growth in emerging-market economies is expected to ease to more sustainable rates over the projection horizon. Steps taken by policy-makers to limit capital inflows and prevent exchange rate movements are impeding the rotation of demand from advanced to emerging-market economies that is necessary for a sustainable recovery.
 
The Bank has long expected that the US recovery will be slower than in previous postwar cycles, consistent with the historical experience following financial crises. Although modest recovery in private domestic demand is still projected to more than offset the drag from the unwinding of fiscal stimulus, the overall outlook for US economic growth is weaker than was anticipated in the July Report. This reflects delayed recovery in the US labour market, more protracted weakness in housing and a slightly more modest contribution from exports.
 
Growth in household spending is expected to pick up gradually, sustained by a measured improvement in the pace of job creation, even as households continue to address balance-sheet pressures through elevated savings rates. Consumption will also continue to be influenced by fiscal policy decisions, as well as by developments in the housing market, where a sharp rebound in the near term looks unlikely despite the substantial declines in both prices and housing starts.
 
Conditional on the recovery progressing and confidence improving, US businesses are expected to increase hiring and boost spending on equipment and software. This will be supported by strong corporate balance sheets, low financing costs and modest improvements in lending conditions, particularly for small and medium-sized enterprises. Growth in investment in structures is anticipated to be slower than investment in equipment and software, however, owing to the high level of vacant office and retail space. Firmer external demand for US goods and services, prompted by an anticipated further depreciation of the US dollar, is expected to support growth in net exports over the projection horizon.
 
In the euro area, the recovery is expected to be modest through 2011-12, owing to the restraining effects of fiscal consolidation and a stronger euro. Growth in core economies will depend importantly on export demand. Growth in peripheral economies is projected to be constrained by higher financing costs and large fiscal adjustments.
 
In Japan, growth in domestic demand is expected to be weaker than had been anticipated in July, although some pickup remains likely as labour market conditions improve. Net exports are expected to remain the principal driver of growth through 2012, supported by strong external demand, especially from Asia.
 
In China, real GDP growth is projected to converge gradually towards trend growth of 8 to 9 per cent over the projection horizon, owing to the withdrawal of fiscal stimulus and the restraining effects of policy measures to cool the property market. A gradual rotation of demand towards consumption and away from investment is expected to continue, supported by rising wages and an anticipated modest appreciation of the Chinese currency.
 
A gradual slowing of real GDP growth is expected in other emerging-market economies, reflecting the withdrawal of fiscal stimulus and, in some cases, a tightening in monetary policy in response to inflationary pressures.
 
The Bank's commodity price index is expected to increase over the projection horizon. Non-energy commodity prices are expected to rise through 2012, albeit to a lower level than had been expected at the time of the July Report, in line with downward revisions to the Bank's projection for global demand. The expected path for natural gas prices (as suggested by the latest futures curve) has also been revised downwards over the projection horizon, owing to softer US demand and ongoing excess supply in the market. The latest crude oil futures curve, however, suggests that prices will be higher than previously anticipated.
 
The economic outlook for Canada has changed. The economy is entering a period of more modest growth, following the robust expansion of domestic demand since mid-2009 that restored pre-crisis levels of output and employment. The composition of demand in Canada is expected to shift away from household and government expenditures towards business investment and net exports. The strength of net exports will be sensitive to currency movements, the expected recovery in productivity growth and the prospects for external demand. With accommodative financial conditions continuing to provide support, economic growth is projected to be sufficient to absorb excess capacity, although at a more gradual pace than anticipated in the July Report. As a consequence, the Bank now projects a slightly more subdued profile for core inflation over the projection horizon.
 
Canadian real GDP growth slowed to 2.0 per cent (at an annual rate) in the second quarter, a larger deceleration than expected in the July Report. This growth brought real GDP back to its pre-recession level, reflecting strength in household and government spending.
 
Household consumption and housing investment in the second quarter were supported by further improvement in the labour market, with the growth of personal disposable income receiving an extra lift from unusually large tax refunds. Consumers also continued to take advantage of exceptionally stimulative credit conditions, pushing household debt levels to record highs.
 
Following a steep decline and delayed recovery, the rebound in business investment finally gained momentum in the second quarter, with a sharp rise in spending on machinery and equipment. Businesses also replenished their inventories to levels more consistent with sales.
 
Net exports subtracted from growth in the second quarter as imports were boosted by strength in business investment and higher inventories. The recent deterioration in the real trade balance also reflects a deterioration in Canadian competitiveness in recent years, as relative unit labour costs have increased.
 
The Bank estimates that real GDP decelerated slightly in the third quarter to an annual growth rate of 1.6 per cent, reflecting a smaller contribution to growth from personal consumption and a sizable drop in housing investment. As well, the large contribution to growth from inventory investment in the first and second quarters is not expected to be repeated. Growth in the third quarter was likely supported by further strong recovery in business investment and some pickup in government expenditures, while recent data suggest a continued drag from net exports.
 
The Bank has revised its profile for potential output growth in Canada very slightly, as part of its annual comprehensive reassessment. Potential output growth is now expected to increase from 1.6 per cent in 2010 to 2.1 per cent in 2013. Trend productivity growth is projected to improve as a result of stronger investment and the dissipation of the adverse effects of restructuring in some sectors, while demographic forces continue to push down the trend rate of labour input growth.
 
Various indicators of capacity suggest that considerable slack remains in the Canadian economy. Excess capacity diminished noticeably through the early part of the year from its peak in the third quarter of 2009, but has increased marginally in recent months.
 
The Bank's conventional measure indicates that the output gap widened slightly in the third quarter to about -1.9 per cent. The Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey also indicated that the proportion of firms that would have difficulty responding to an unexpected increase in demand remained below the historical average, declining slightly from the summer survey.
 
Although the economy has recouped the 400,000 jobs lost during the recession, there has been greater recourse to part-time employment by firms. Partly as a result, average hours worked still remain well below their pre-recession level. At the same time, results from the autumn Business Outlook Survey indicate that the percentage of firms facing labour shortages has risen in recent months, but is still well below its historical average.
 
On balance, the Bank judges that the economy was operating at about 1 3/4 per cent below its production capacity in the third quarter of 2010, a slightly greater degree of slack than had been estimated in the July Report.
 
Core inflation remained close to 2 per cent through early 2010 before declining slightly in recent months. The 12-month rate of change in the core CPI reached 1.6 per cent in July and August, slightly below the Bank's expectations at the time of the July Report. The recent moderation in core inflation is consistent with the persistence of considerable excess supply in the economy and the observed decline in the growth of unit labour costs. Temporary factors that had boosted the core rate of inflation earlier in the year, such as the unusual pricing pattern for new motor vehicles, have now unwound.
 
Total CPI inflation has increased from its recent trough of 1.0 per cent in June, reaching 1.7 per cent in August, owing largely to the impact of changes in provincial indirect taxes.  This is also slightly below the Bank's expectations in the July Report, reflecting marginally softer core inflation and lower-than-anticipated natural gas prices for consumers.
 
Recent survey measures indicate that inflation expectations remain well anchored at the 2 per cent target. The October Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation in 2011 was 2.0 per cent. As reported in the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey, 85 per cent of firms expect average inflation over the next two years to remain within the 1 to 3 per cent control range. Market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations also continue to be consistent with the 2 per cent inflation target.
 
Financial conditions in Canada remain exceptionally stimulative, providing important ongoing support to the economic recovery.
 
Lower government bond yields and narrow bank funding spreads have kept effective borrowing costs for Canadian households very low by historical standards, despite increases in the policy interest rate. Reflecting these low borrowing costs, household credit has continued to expand at a robust pace, although recent growth has been marginally slower than earlier in the year.
 
Effective borrowing costs for Canadian businesses also remain extremely low. Corporate bond yields across a range of credit ratings have reached record lows despite near-record issuance, as strong investor demand has kept spreads narrow, while government yields have declined. Canadian firms' access to bank financing has also improved in recent months, according to both the Bank's Senior Loan Officer Survey and the Business Outlook Survey. In particular, the Senior Loan Officer Survey suggests that the easing in lending conditions for large corporate borrowers in recent quarters has broadened to commercial borrowers, reflecting heightened competition among lenders amid modest growth in loan demand. This soft demand is mirrored in the continued sluggish growth of overall business credit, reflecting the availability of firms' internal funds and the still-low level of investment.
 
Growth in narrow monetary aggregates has slowed in recent months from the unusually rapid pace earlier in the year, consistent with diminishing liquidity preference among households and firms. Growth in the broader M2++ aggregate remains below its historical average, suggesting subdued inflation pressures ahead.
 
The Canadian dollar has averaged 97 cents US over the past three months and 98 cents US since the 8 September interest rate announcement, slightly higher than the 96 cents US assumed in the July Report.
 
The Bank's base-case projection for growth incorporates the following key assumptions: a Canada/US exchange rate averaging 98 cents US; energy prices in line with recent futures prices; higher prices for non-energy commodities as the global economy recovers; and supportive global credit conditions.
 
The economic expansion is weaker than the Bank had projected in its July Report. This reflects a more gradual global recovery and a somewhat more subdued profile for household spending. Over the projection horizon, the composition of demand in Canada is expected to shift away from government and household expenditures towards business investment and net exports. On an average annual basis, real GDP is projected to grow by 3.0 per cent in 2010, 2.3 per cent in 2011 and 2.6 per cent in 2012. The economy is expected to return to full capacity by the end of 2012.
 
In the Bank's base-case scenario, growth in household expenditures is expected to decelerate to a pace closer to that of income growth over the projection horizon. As in the July Report, growth in personal disposable income is expected to slow as a result of the withdrawal of fiscal stimulus, announced compensation restraints by governments and a slow recovery in average hours worked. A weaker global outlook is now expected to further moderate income growth. Moreover, Canadian household balance sheets are also increasingly stretched, and private consumption is unlikely to be bolstered by gains in house prices going forward.
 
As the Bank had expected, housing activity has declined markedly in recent months. Residential investment still remains near historically high levels but is expected to weaken further into 2011, reflecting subdued income growth and declining affordability.
 
Based on budget announcements, the Bank assumes that fiscal stimulus will end in early 2011, and that the contribution of government spending to overall real GDP growth will turn mildly negative.
 
Following an unusually sharp contraction, business investment is projected to increase to levels consistent with previous recoveries, reflecting efforts to improve competitiveness, firms' strong financial positions and favourable credit conditions. This projection is consistent with the new high in the balance of opinion regarding firms' intentions to invest in machinery and equipment reported in the latest Business Outlook Survey. In particular, firms reported an increasing focus on enhancing productivity. The projected investment profile in the Bank's base-case scenario should contribute to raising potential output in Canada.
 
At the same time, with the adjustment in the stock-to-sales ratio completed, business inventories are expected to provide very modest support to overall real GDP growth over the projection horizon.
 
The expanding world economy is expected to provide support to Canadian exports over the projection horizon. However, with weaker projected growth in US activity over the remainder of 2010 and 2011 and competitiveness challenges, Canadian exports are expected to rise less rapidly than previously anticipated. As in the July Report, the growth of imports is projected to ease markedly from the rapid pace of late 2009 and early 2010, owing in part to slower growth in final domestic demand, as well as the end of the inventory cycle.
 
With a larger and more persistent output gap than previously assumed, the profile for core inflation is more subdued than in the July Report. Core inflation is expected to remain near current levels in coming quarters before edging up to 2 per cent by the end of 2012, as excess supply in the economy is gradually absorbed and inflation expectations remain well anchored. As well, ongoing modest growth in labour compensation, combined with an anticipated pickup in productivity, is expected to restrain growth in unit labour costs and, in turn, inflation pressures. Over the coming quarters, core inflation will also be dampened by the transitory effect of the harmonized sales tax introduced in two provinces in July, as associated tax refunds to businesses are passed through to consumers.
 
The direct impact of recent changes in consumption taxes in Ontario, British Columbia and Nova Scotia is a temporary rise of 0.7 percentage points in the year-over-year rate of increase in total CPI from July 2010 to June 2011. The Bank's base-case projection for inflation also incorporates an estimate for the announced increase in the provincial sales tax in Quebec, effective in January 2011, which is expected to add about 0.1 percentage points to total CPI inflation over 2011. As with previous changes in indirect taxes, for the purposes of monetary policy, the Bank will look through the first-round effect on prices of these changes in provincial sales taxes.
 
Total CPI inflation is also projected to be more subdued than was anticipated in July, mainly reflecting the lower profile for core inflation. The impact on total CPI inflation of the higher profile for crude oil prices is partially offset by the higher value assumed for the Canadian dollar. Over coming quarters, with the gradual dissipation of the effect from the earlier reduction in mortgage interest costs, total CPI inflation (excluding the effect of changes in indirect taxes) is expected to rise gradually to the 2 per cent target by the end of 2012.
 
This projection includes a gradual reduction in monetary stimulus over the projection horizon, consistent with achieving the inflation target.
 
The uncertainty surrounding the Bank's inflation projection is illustrated using fan charts. Chart 28 and Chart 29 depict the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the fourth quarter of 2010 to the end of 2012.
 
The Bank has downgraded its outlook for the Canadian and global economies, and important risks remain around this outlook. The Bank judges that the risks to inflation are roughly balanced.
 
The three main upside risks to the inflation outlook are higher commodity prices, a stronger-than-anticipated recovery in the US economy, and the possibility of greater-than-projected momentum in the Canadian household sector:
 
Commodity prices might rise faster and further than currently projected, boosting incomes in Canada and stimulating investment activity. Commodity prices could be supported by stronger-than-expected growth in emerging-market economies and heightened investor interest in commodities, fuelled by exceptionally low global interest rates and ample liquidity. Greater-than-expected improvements in housing and labour markets in the United States could boost consumer and business confidence in that country, resulting in stronger export demand for Canadian goods and services.
 
Household spending in Canada could be stronger than expected if borrowing continues to exceed income growth, or if growth in incomes were to rebound more rapidly than the Bank projects.
 
These upside risks to inflation are balanced by three downside risks relating to Canada's international competitiveness, global growth prospects, and the possibility of a more pronounced correction in the Canadian housing market:
 
A combination of disappointing productivity performance and persistent strength in the Canadian dollar could dampen the expected recovery of Canada's net exports. Heightened tensions in foreign exchange markets could inhibit necessary global adjustment and put additional pressure on freely floating currencies.
 
Global deflationary forces could intensify if the necessary rotation of demand from deficit countries to surplus countries and from the public to the private sector is delayed or fails to materialize.
 
If there were a sudden weakening in the Canadian housing sector, it could have sizable spillover effects on other areas of the economy, such as consumption, given the high debt loads of some Canadian households.