Oil prices have plummeted over the past six months. Lower oil prices are expected to boost global economic growth while widening the divergences among economies. These developments are taking place against the backdrop of a modest pickup in global growth, as headwinds from ongoing deleveraging and lingering uncertainty gradually abate.
 
Within this mixed global picture, the main area of strength is the United States, Canada's largest trading partner. Economic growth in the United States is expected to become increasingly self-sustaining, further propelled by the large positive impact from oil-price declines, despite the drag from the appreciation of the US dollar. In other advanced economies, particularly the euro area and Japan, growth is expected to remain weak despite additional policy stimulus, as the headwinds from deleveraging and uncertainty dissipate gradually. Those headwinds are also expected to temper the positive effects of lower oil prices on advanced economies. In the rest of the world, GDP growth is expected to be held back by the negative effects of lower oil prices on oil-exporting countries; however, growth should strengthen gradually through 2016 as foreign demand in advanced economies picks up and growth-enhancing structural reforms are implemented.
 
Taking these various countervailing factors into account, the Bank anticipates a pickup in global economic growth to about 3 1/2 per cent over the next two years, a similar growth profile to that presented in the October 2014 Monetary Policy Report.
 
Global crude oil prices have fallen by more than 40 per cent since the October Report and by more than 55 per cent since their recent peak in June 2014. Until mid-2014, oil prices were fairly stable, since the unexpectedly rapid increase in North American production, especially from US shale oil, was roughly offset by unplanned outages elsewhere in the world. In the second half of 2014, however, some of these outages ended, while the supply of US shale oil continued to grow. At the same time, global oil demand has been repeatedly revised down. These forces have driven global oil prices down to their lowest level in more than five years.
 
By convention, the Bank assumes that energy prices will remain near their recent levels. The prices for Brent, West Texas Intermediate and Western Canada Select in US dollars have averaged roughly $60, $55 and $40, respectively, since early December.
 
The near-term risks to the assumption for oil prices are skewed to the downside. Prevailing prices are weaker than the Bank's base-case assumption, and production growth could remain strong over the coming months, owing to past investment and hedging, as well as ongoing price competition for market share among the major producers. Global oil demand is typically low in the winter months, and could also continue to disappoint in the context of moderate global economic growth.
 
Given structural changes in the oil market, particularly as a result of the US shale supply, there is much uncertainty regarding future prices. This, in turn, reflects uncertainty about the impact of further technological advances, demand and the cost of capital.
 
Over the medium term, there are both upside and downside risks to the price of oil.
 
Most of the upside risks are supply-driven. Based on recent estimates of production costs, roughly one-third of current production could be uneconomical if prices stay around US$60, notably high-cost production in the United States, Canada, Brazil and Mexico. More than two-thirds of the expected increase in the world oil supply would similarly be uneconomical. A decline in private and public investment in high-cost projects could significantly reduce future growth in the oil supply, and the members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries would have limited spare capacity to replace a significant decrease in the non-OPEC supply.
 
Prices could also rise if OPEC decides to lower its production level. Lastly, geopolitical issues are perennial sources of volatility in oil prices, and supply disruptions can emerge at any time.
 
On the downside, further technological advances and cost-cutting measures by oil-producing firms could lower their costs of production, thereby reducing the break-even costs of some energy projects. More fundamentally, the structure of the global oil market and the behaviour of producers may change from what has been observed over the past several decades. In addition, ongoing innovation to improve energy efficiency and environmental regulations could dampen the demand for oil.
 
Overall, the Bank views the risks to the US$60 price assumption to be tilted to the upside over the medium term.
 
Prices for non-energy commodities have softened modestly, on average, since the October Report, with a pickup in grain prices mostly offsetting lower prices for other commodities.
 
Prices for base metals such as copper and iron ore have declined further since October, with demand growth from China continuing to moderate as the authorities work to rebalance their economy. These price movements have generally been less pronounced than those observed in oil markets, however, suggesting that recent shifts in global demand are not the driving force behind the large movements in oil prices. Lumber prices have also eased somewhat, as is typical during the winter months when construction activity slows.
 
Overall, prices for non-energy commodities are expected to remain subdued through the first half of 2015 and then gradually rise as the global economy gains strength. This profile is roughly unchanged from the October Report. Still, owing to the sharp downward revision to the outlook for oil prices, the Bank's commodity price index is about 20 per cent lower than in the October Report.
 
Lower oil prices act as a tax cut for consumers and firms by reducing the prices of transportation and other petroleum-related goods and services. As a result, they are, on net, positive for global economic growth. However, the impact of lower oil prices is, of course, quite different for net oil exporters than for net oil-importing countries.
 
For a large number of advanced economies, as well as China and other oil importing emerging-market economies , the drop in oil prices boosts GDP growth because of an improvement in their terms of trade, gains in real disposable income for consumers and a reduction in business costs.
 
In the current economic context, however, the Bank expects that persistent headwinds and other mitigating factors will influence the extent to which some oil-importing countries benefit from lower prices. As a result, the drop in oil prices is expected to be a more modest boon to growth compared with past experience. Lingering uncertainty and ongoing deleveraging will lead some consumers to use the gains in disposable income to pay down debt rather than increase their spending.
 
In China, the near-term impact of lower oil prices on GDP may be offset by a reduction in policy stimulus. Weaker oil prices would allow Chinese authorities to reduce policy support for growth, while also facilitating further reforms that will help rebalance the economy and mitigate risks in the financial sector.
 
Falling oil prices are a net negative for oil-exporting countries because they cause a deterioration in their terms of trade and weaken investment and government revenues. However, lower oil prices also put downward pressure on the currencies of oil exporters, which helps to cushion the negative impact on their economies.
 
In some EME oil exporters, the large decline in oil prices has spurred significant financial market turmoil, which has led to capital outflows, large increases in sovereign spreads, and significant currency depreciation and volatility in foreign exchange markets. This turmoil has been particularly acute in Russia, where low oil prices have compounded existing challenges from economic sanctions. There is a risk that financial market turbulence could spread to other oil-exporting nations and even to other EMEs, dampening their prospects for economic growth. The decline in oil prices will push down total inflation everywhere, against a backdrop of persistent global excess capacity and subdued inflationary pressures. The impact on inflation is especially important for the euro area, where headline inflation has fallen below zero, increasing the risk that inflation expectations could become de-anchored.
 
US economic activity strengthened through 2014. Although activity continues to rely on ongoing accommodative monetary policy, fundamentals are improving and should lead to further growth in US private domestic demand. Stronger business investment is indicative of improved confidence. Credit conditions, other than for housing (for example, for auto financing), have eased considerably. Moreover, in 2015, government spending is expected to resume growing on an annual basis for the first time in five years.
 
The US labour market has improved. Job gains have averaged close to 250,000 per month through 2014; the unemployment rate has fallen; and other labour market indicators, including the Bank's labour market indicator for the United States, have improved.
 
The decline in oil prices will provide a further boost to economic activity. The estimated impact of a decline in oil prices from the June 2014 level of about US$110 to the base-case assumption of US$60 would be to raise the level of US GDP by about 1 per cent by the end of 2016.
 
Overall, the combination of the recent stronger-than-expected US growth and lower oil prices, partially offset by the appreciation of the US dollar over recent months, results in a more positive outlook for the US economy than anticipated in the October Report.
 
In the euro area and Japan, economic growth has faltered, prompting additional policy stimulus and the expectation of further action. While both economies will benefit from lower oil prices and exchange rate depreciation, these effects will be tempered by the weak and uncertain economic environment. Growth in the euro-area economy will likely remain anemic, owing to high debt levels, tight credit conditions and weak labour markets. In Japan, a surprisingly weak third quarter prompted the Bank of Japan to step up quantitative easing, and the government to postpone the planned sales tax hike and introduce further fiscal stimulus. Reflecting these measures, as well as lower oil prices and a weaker yen, the outlook for economic growth in Japan in 2016 has been revised upward, although it remains modest.
 
Reflecting these developments, the monetary policies of the major advanced economies are expected to follow increasingly divergent paths. Markets expect the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan to be implementing unconventional policies for an extended period. This contrasts with the expectation that the US Federal Reserve will begin normalizing monetary policy in 2015 as the US economy continues to strengthen. These anticipated differences in policy paths have put additional downward pressure on major currencies against the US dollar. For example, the euro and the yen have fallen by roughly 10 per cent against the US dollar since the October Report. The expectation of low inflation and further monetary policy measures in some advanced economies, together with increased demand for safe assets (owing to geopolitical, macroeconomic and oil-price uncertainty), has pushed yields on long-term government bonds in advanced economies down further since October to new record lows in many countries.
 
Since October, the Canadian dollar has depreciated against the US dollar, reflecting the drop in oil prices and the widespread strength of the US currency, but is little changed against the currencies of Canada's other major trading partners. By convention, the Canadian dollar is assumed to be close to its recent average level of 86 cents over the projection horizon, compared with 89 cents assumed in October.
 
Inflation in Canada has remained close to the 2 per cent target in recent quarters. Core inflation has been temporarily boosted by some sector-specific factors and the pass-through effects of the depreciation in the Canadian dollar, which provide an offset to disinflationary pressures from slack in the economy and the effects of competition in the retail sector. Total CPI inflation softened noticeably in November, reflecting lower energy prices, and will fall substantially further in coming months.
 
The large decline in oil prices will weigh significantly on the Canadian economy. While real GDP growth has been solid and more broadly based in recent quarters, near-term growth is expected to slow as investment in the energy sector responds rapidly to lower oil prices. In addition, Canada's weakening terms of trade will have an adverse impact on income and wealth, with implications for consumption and public finances. The negative impact of lower oil prices will be gradually mitigated by stronger US growth, the weaker Canadian dollar and the beneficial impact of lower oil prices on global economic growth. Given the speed and magnitude of the oil price decline, there is substantial uncertainty around the likely level for oil prices and their impact on the economic outlook for Canada.
 
Bearing in mind this uncertainty, in its base-case projection, the Bank expects that in the first half of this year real GDP growth will slow to about 1 1/2 per cent and the degree of excess capacity will widen somewhat. The Bank expects the economy to gradually strengthen, starting in the second half of 2015, with the output gap closing around the end of 2016, a little later than was expected in October.
 
Relative to October, the year-over-year growth rate for real GDP in the fourth quarter of 2015 has been revised down by 0.5 percentage points to 1.9 per cent. In the fourth quarter of 2016, growth has been revised up by 0.3 percentage points to 2.5 per cent.
 
While total CPI inflation is projected to fall as a result of the drop in energy prices, and to be temporarily below the inflation-control range during 2015, the Bank anticipates that total CPI inflation will move back up to target the following year. Core inflation is expected to soften in the near term and remain close to 2 per cent over the projection horizon.
 
Both total CPI and core inflation have hovered near 2 per cent in recent quarters, about 1 percentage point higher than a year earlier. The increase in core inflation over the past year is largely due to some sector-specific factors and the temporary effects of a lower Canadian dollar. Even without these factors, there has been a small upward drift in underlying inflation, consistent with the recent trend shown by alternative measures of core inflation.
 
Sector-specific factors are temporarily raising core inflation by about 0.3 percentage points. Of these factors, the most important are meat and communications prices, which are boosting core inflation by a combined 0.4 percentage points relative to their historical average contribution. Continued supply constraints for cattle have prevented inflation in meat prices from abating. On the other hand, travel tours prices declined sharply in November, dampening core inflation by about 0.1 percentage point.
 
The effect of the pass-through from exchange rate depreciation is estimated to be currently raising core inflation by about 0.2 to 0.3 percentage points. The impact from pass-through is difficult to estimate precisely, for at least two reasons. First, hedging has insulated some prices from immediately showing the full impact of currency movements. Second, it is not easy to separate the impact on prices of pass-through from the effects of retail competition, since both factors tend to affect the same categories of goods with high import content. Nevertheless, a comparison of price developments in Canada with those in the United States supports our assessment of the effects of pass-through.
 
Retail competition and continued slack in the economy are having a dampening effect on core inflation. The Bank estimates that core inflation would be about 0.3 - 0.4 percentage points higher without their combined effects.
 
Total CPI inflation in the fourth quarter of 2014 is estimated to have been 0.2 percentage points lower than expected in October. The downward revision is due to the weaker-than-anticipated energy prices associated with the drop in oil prices.
 
Real GDP grew more rapidly in the third quarter than anticipated in October, driven by further solid gains in household spending and exports, and a rebound in business investment. In the fourth quarter, real GDP is estimated to have grown by about 2 1/2 per cent.
 
The net effect of recent stronger-than-expected growth, together with significant upward revisions to historical data going back to 2011, is that the levels of real GDP and potential output in the fourth quarter of 2014 are now estimated to be 0.9 and 0.7 per cent higher, respectively, than assumed in October. The three main indicators that the Bank uses to assess overall pressures on production-based capacity in the economy continue to indicate some excess capacity but provide different signals as to its magnitude. Both the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey and the statistical measure of the output gap suggest that the gap is quite small, while the structural estimate of the output gap suggests that the gap is larger, on the order of about 1 per cent.
 
Many labour market indicators point to significant slack in the economy. For example, the structural estimate of the labour input gap is currently around -1 1/2 per cent. The Bank's comprehensive measure of labour market performance (the LMI) continues to fluctuate in the range observed over the past several years, suggesting both more labour market slack and less improvement in labour market conditions than indicated by the unemployment rate. Relative to the unemployment rate, improvement in the LMI has been held back by other labour market developments: long-term unemployment is still close to its post-crisis peak, average hours worked remain low, and the proportion of involuntary part-time workers continues to be elevated. In another sign of ongoing labour market challenges, the participation rate is low relative to what would be suggested by purely demographic forces. Wage increases are moderate, with pressures on inflation dampened by the robust pickup in labour productivity during 2014.
 
Measures of the utilization of the existing capital stock are less indicative of excess capacity, as would be expected, given the destructive forces that accompany a longer and more persistent recession such as the recent global recession. Capacity utilization in the manufacturing sector increased further in the third quarter, to about 84 per cent, above its long-term average of about 81 per cent. This elevated level of utilization follows a challenging period of adjustment for the sector, and is consistent with the manufacturing sector entering a rebuilding phase. Responses to the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey indicate that firms benefiting from strengthening US demand and improvements in exports have started to feel some pressures on their capacity. For example, over the past year, a growing share of exporters have cited physical capacity constraints as an obstacle to meeting a sudden increase in demand or sales.
 
Taking into account the various indicators of capacity pressures and the uncertainty surrounding any point estimate, the Bank judges that the amount of excess capacity in the fourth quarter was between 1/4 and 1 1/4 per cent. This range suggests about 1/4 of a percentage point less excess capacity than was estimated in October for the third quarter.
 
The considerably lower profile for oil prices will be unambiguously negative for the Canadian economy in 2015 and subsequent years.
 
In the near term, real GDP growth is expected to slow to below the growth rate of potential output, and the unemployment rate is expected to rise as investment in the energy sector rapidly contracts in response to lower oil prices and as housing market activity in energy-intensive regions slows. Growth in the first half of 2015 is anticipated to average about 1 1/2 per cent, considerably weaker than the growth rate of about 2 1/2 per cent expected in October. To illustrate the degree of uncertainty in the base case associated with the Bank's assumption for the price of oil, if oil prices were to remain around US$50 (rather than US$60, as assumed), real GDP growth would fall to about 1 1/4 per cent in the first half of 2015. By the end of the year, the output gap would widen by roughly an additional 1/4 percentage point.
 
Lower oil prices reverse roughly one-third of the income gains associated with the improvement in Canada's terms of trade since 2002, which will weigh on consumption and public finances over the projection horizon. The negative impacts of weaker oil prices for the Canadian economy will be gradually offset over the projection horizon by other effects of the price change, including the net positive impact on the global economy, and especially on the United States, and the depreciation of the Canadian dollar.
 
Real GDP growth is expected to pick up to about 2 1/4 per cent in the second half of 2015 and to strengthen further to about 2 1/2 per cent, on average, in 2016. The Bank expects that the economy will reach full capacity around the end of 2016, a little later than had been predicted in October.
 
While the net impact of lower oil prices on the Canadian economy is negative, the effects across regions and sectors are expected to vary significantly. Lower oil prices will curtail business investment in energy-related industries, restrain housing activity in energy-intensive regions and provide some incentives for households whose incomes rely on the oil sector to build precautionary savings. In contrast, the manufacturing sector will benefit from stronger demand in the United States, lower shipping costs and the weaker Canadian dollar.
 
If the recent decline in oil prices proves durable, there could be a persistent shift of investment and jobs away from energy-related sectors and regions, thereby reversing some earlier structural adjustment in Canada's economy.
 
The Bank's latest Business Outlook Survey provides information about the early responses of firms to this shock. The balances of opinion on future sales growth, hiring and capital spending intentions are all lower than in the previous survey. Businesses also report a higher level of uncertainty about the economy. Not surprisingly, responses from firms in the Prairies are particularly negative. On the other hand, sentiment in the export sector has continued to improve, with manufacturers now more positive than other sectors regarding investment intentions and employment.
 
While business investment had been showing some encouraging signs in the third quarter of 2014, the near-term outlook appears much less positive. The most important near-term impact of the lower oil prices on Canadian real GDP is expected to be from lower investment in the oil and gas sector, which is now projected to fall by roughly 30 per cent in 2015 and remain broadly unchanged in 2016. By itself, this drop would reduce overall business investment by about 10 per cent.
 
Interviews with energy firms conducted by Bank staff in November and December 2014 suggest a relatively quick investment response to lower oil prices, with firms already scaling back projects planned for 2015.
 
Oil prices are now lower than current full-cycle break-even costs for many projects. Financing constraints also appear to be playing an important role. The negative consequences of the oil-price shock are also likely to feed through to firms that provide support to the oil sector, including rail transportation.
 
With lower oil prices, the growth rates of Canadian energy production and exports are expected to slow. Energy exports are now projected to grow at an annual average rate of about 1 per cent, compared with about 6 per cent in 2014.
 
Exports of non-energy goods rebounded in 2014, with continued strong growth in the third quarter of 2014. Growth in non-energy exports has been particularly evident in categories that are more sensitive to the exchange rate. The recovery in non-energy exports is expected to continue over the projection horizon, with exports stimulated by the lower Canadian dollar and stronger foreign activity.
 
Outside the energy sector, there are signs that the hoped for sequence of increased foreign demand, stronger exports, improved business confidence and investment, and employment growth is progressing. Some industries, such as transportation and manufacturing, will benefit from lower oil prices through lower input costs, which could stimulate some additional investment. Moreover, business fixed investment outside the oil and gas sector is expected to strengthen as the pickup in non-energy exports is increasingly perceived as sustainable.
 
However, there is considerable uncertainty about the speed with which this sequence will evolve and also about how the drop in oil prices could affect that process.
 
Household spending remained strong in the third quarter of 2014, with further solid gains in motor vehicle sales and robust housing activity.
 
Over the projection horizon, consumption growth is expected to slow as the negative terms-of-trade shock from lower oil prices leads to higher unemployment and restrains income growth and wealth. In the near term, households will have money saved on energy purchases to reallocate. With increased risks of layoffs, those households whose incomes rely on the oil sector will have greater incentives to build precautionary savings or pay down debt. Others may choose instead to increase their spending on goods and services.
 
The oil-price shock will also affect housing activity in energy-intensive regions. There has been a decrease in housing starts and a sharp drop in resales and sales-to-listings ratios in Alberta in December. Near-term housing activity elsewhere is expected to remain high, supported by very low mortgage rates, although the extent to which the downturn already evident in Alberta will spill over into other regions remains to be seen. On the whole, residential investment as a share of GDP is expected to decline gradually over the projection horizon.
 
Household imbalances remain elevated and are expected to edge up in the near term, given the continued strength of house prices and resale activity in some regions. Energy-intensive regions will be more susceptible to declining house prices and rising unemployment rates, which would increase financial sector vulnerabilities. Overall, the ramifications of the oil price shock for household imbalances will depend importantly on the impact of the shock on income and employment.
 
Lower oil prices will also have significant implications for public finances, notably for oil-producing provinces. The government spending assumptions contained in this base case are broadly unchanged from October and reflect already announced fiscal measures, as is the Bank's convention.
 
Core inflation is expected to ease through the middle of 2015 as the temporary boost to inflation from sector-specific factors falls out of the inflation data. Thereafter, core inflation is expected to remain fairly steady, at close to 2 per cent, as the downward pressure arising from excess supply and retail competition gradually dissipates and the upward pressure from the pass-through of the depreciation of the dollar fades.
 
Based on the assumption of oil prices at US$60, total CPI inflation is projected to fall sharply and to be below the inflation-control range during 2015. Given the magnitude of the shock to oil prices, there is an exceptional amount of uncertainty about the profile for total CPI. For example, if the base-case scenario were to assume that oil prices were 10 per cent higher , total CPI inflation would be higher by 0.3 percentage points over the coming year.
 
As the economy reaches and remains at full capacity by around the end of 2016, both core and total CPI are projected to be about 2 per cent on a sustained basis.
 
Short-term expectations for total CPI inflation have been revised down considerably, but medium-term expectations remain well anchored. Compared with October, the January Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation for 2015 declined by 0.8 percentage points to 1.1 per cent. The forecast for total CPI inflation for 2016 is 2.1 per cent. Results of the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey show that the majority of firms still expect inflation over the next two years to be within the 1 to 3 per cent range, with a shift toward the bottom half of the range. The central tendency is about 1 3/4 per cent.
 
Based on the past dispersion of private sector forecasts, a reasonable range around the base-case projection for total CPI inflation is ±0.3 percentage points. This range is intended to convey a sense of forecast uncertainty. Fan charts, which are derived using statistical analysis of the Bank's forecast errors, provide a complementary perspective.
 
The outlook for inflation is subject to several risks emanating from both the external environment and the domestic economy. The Bank judges that the risks to the projected path for inflation are roughly balanced.
 
Stronger-than-expected private demand in the United States is the most important upside risk to inflation in Canada. Recent momentum, combined with the boost from lower oil prices, could spur even stronger activity, rekindling animal spirits in the United States. In turn, businesses would increase hiring and investment by more than expected, providing further support for household spending and economic activity more generally. Robust US activity would generate positive spillovers to growth in the rest of the world, particularly demand for Canada's non-energy exports.
 
Oil prices have fallen sharply since mid-2014, reflecting important supply-side developments and lower growth in global demand. There is a risk that oil prices could fall further if major oil producers continue to expand supply in a context of moderate global economic growth. On the other hand, oil prices could move higher if material outages reappear or if declining investment by higher-cost producers squeezes supply sooner than expected. While lower oil prices would benefit consumers, the effect on Canada would, on balance, be negative, reducing Canada's terms of trade and domestic income. Persistently lower-than-assumed oil prices could also have a material impact on investment and activity in the oil sector and the associated manufacturing supply chain. A rise in oil prices would mitigate some of the negative impacts that have already occurred.
 
There is a risk that growth in China and other emerging-market economies could be much slower than expected. There are a number of possible triggers for this risk, including a housing-induced slowdown and financial stress in China; a geopolitical event that impairs global confidence; or contagion from EME oil exporters, where the drop in oil prices has exposed significant existing vulnerabilities. It is also possible that potential growth in EMEs is much lower than estimated. A slowdown in EMEs would weigh on US and Canadian economic growth through trade, financial and confidence channels, and put further downward pressure on commodity prices.
 
Recent data remain consistent with a broad-based pickup in non-energy exports, in line with a continued strengthening of the US economy and the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar. However, reduced capacity in many export sectors may limit the extent to which exporters continue to benefit from stronger external demand and the lower Canadian dollar. At the same time, while data for the third quarter of 2014 pointed to the beginning of a rebound in business investment, particularly in machinery and equipment, the realization of a downside risk to exports would also have negative implications for investment. The Bank already projects a significant decline in investment in the oil and gas sector in 2015. Investment spending in this sector could be even weaker based on experience during the oil-price decline witnessed in 1986, which was similar in magnitude to the current episode. Together, a decline in exports and business investment would pose a downside risk to inflation.
 
A soft landing in the housing sector continues to be the most likely scenario, with residential investment expected to gradually decline over the projection horizon. However, near-record-high house prices and debt levels relative to income continue to leave households vulnerable to adverse shocks. The precise magnitude of the impact of the fall in oil prices on household income, spending and, ultimately, on existing imbalances is highly uncertain. However, some further increase in the debt-to-income ratio is likely. A disorderly unwinding of these imbalances, should it materialize, could have sizable negative effects on other parts of the economy and on inflation.