Since the May Report, the international economic environment has continued to improve. Economic activity abroad grew faster than expected, while inflation in the major economies remained subdued. Japanese output increased sharply, following two years of severe recession. In Europe, growth picked up, and a number of the Asian economies that bore the brunt of the 1997-98 financial crisis have staged a remarkable recovery. The US economy again showed surprisingly strong increases in spending and output, as well as low inflation, despite tight labour market conditions and high levels of economic activity.
 
Against this background, Canada's exports grew strongly. Domestic spending also gained momentum, and the margin of unused capacity in the economy declined. Inflation increased moderately, moving towards the middle of the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent target range, and inflation expectations seem to be settling around this level. With core inflation in the lower half of the target range and a degree of slack in the economy, the Bank of Canada kept its target for the overnight interest rate unchanged.
 
In determining the future conduct of monetary policy in Canada, two key issues will have to be faced. First, there is the risk of a buildup of inflation pressures in the United States and the implications for Canada. Second is the momentum of demand in the Canadian economy from both domestic and international sources, combined with the uncertainty surrounding estimates of the potential level of output. These issues will require the Bank to pay very close attention to a wide range of coincident and leading indicators of pressures on inflation in order to make timely policy judgments.
 
In the last six months, core inflation (CPI excluding food, energy, and the effect of changes in indirect taxes) has moved upwards from the lower part of the Bank's inflation-control target range towards the midpoint. This move was broadly in line with expectations but occurred more quickly than expected because of the timing of certain transitory factors.
 
The 12-month rate of increase in the core CPI was 1.9 per cent in September, compared with 1.2 per cent last March. Two other statistical measures of the trend rate of inflation (CPIX and CPIW) are currently at the same level as core inflation.
 
Several developments contributed to the rise in core inflation over the past six months. Prices for most imported consumer goods and services rose markedly as a result of the depreciation of the Canadian dollar between the autumn of 1997 and the latter part of 1998, contributing significantly to higher consumer prices.
 
Core inflation continued to be held up by the general expectation that longer-term inflation would be close to the middle of the inflation-control target range. The brisk pace of price cuts for both computer products and long-distance telephone service, which has been an important feature of overall price developments, began to slow. In addition, airfares rose considerably and unexpectedly, partly because of sharply higher fuel prices.
 
At the same time, two fundamental influences limited the increase in core inflation. Some slack in product and labour markets was present throughout this period, and unit labour costs have been largely unchanged over the past year.
 
Sharp gains in the prices of both gasoline and natural gas pushed the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI up significantly to 2.6 per cent in September, from 1.0 per cent in March. This increase should be temporary, given that international oil prices are no longer under upward pressure. Total CPI should therefore move down towards the core inflation rate through next year.
 
Increased prices for the commodities that Canada exports led a recovery in the chain price index for GDP over the first half of 1999 after its decline in 1998. This economy-wide measure of prices rose by 1.0 per cent during the past year. Price gains continued to be modest for both consumer expenditures (similar to those recorded in the CPI) and business fixed investment.
 
World commodity prices have rebounded considerably since the end of 1998 because of firmer global demand and some restrictions in supply. Metals prices rose sharply over this period, reflecting an increase in Asian and European demand as well as production cutbacks for certain metals. Crude oil prices surged between March and September with news of major cutbacks by OPEC and several non-OPEC producers, as well as mounting demand in the United States. In contrast, market conditions for many foodstuffs remain soft because of abundant supplies.
 
The Bridge/CRB index, a broad index of commodity prices followed by many analysts, has recently performed sluggishly compared with the significant rise in the Bank of Canada's commodity price index. This results mainly from the weakness in the price of food products combined with a weight on these products that is much greater in the CRB index than in the Canadian economy.
 
Canada's economy expanded robustly in the first three quarters of 1999, continuing to take up slack. Monetary conditions remained accommodative, US aggregate demand was exceptionally strong, and the Asian economy and world commodity markets began to turn around. As a result, Canada's real GDP (based on national accounts data) rose at an annual rate of 3.8 per cent in the first half of 1999, compared with 2.8 per cent between the fourth quarter of 1997 and the fourth quarter of 1998. Growth in the third quarter of 1999 is expected to be even more robust than in the first half, as indicated by strong quarterly automobile sales as well as by healthy retail sales and production in July and
 
Household expenditures rose much more strongly in the first six months of 1999 than in the second half of 1998. As a result, the personal savings rate declined further, reaching a very low level by mid-1999. (The overall national savings rate has, however, shown a rising trend since 1992.)
 
A number of labour market factors helped raise consumer confidence, which contributed to the considerable boost in sales of housing and durable goods in the first half of 1999 and into the third quarter. Marked employment gains over the past year were particularly evident in full-time, non-self-employed positions. Better job prospects brought workers back into the labour force, and participation rates rose for both sexes at all age levels. Even so, since mid-1998 the unemployment rate has decreased by 1.2 percentage points.
 
Business investment in capital goods increased very strongly in the first half of 1999, as business confidence recovered in light of favourable international developments. In addition, the intense pace of price-cutting for computers that began in mid-1998 and the need to upgrade systems to ensure year-2000 compliance contributed to a surge in purchases of computers and other office equipment.
 
Inventory investment began to recover in the first half of the year. Firms tried to restore stocks to normal levels following the unanticipated strength in exports of manufactured goods to the United States in late 1998.
 
With more rapid growth in domestic demand, particularly for import-intensive items such as machinery and equipment, import volumes rose much more strongly in the first half of 1999 than in the second half of 1998.
 
Canadian export growth, while continuing at a strong pace, was not quite as vigorous as that recorded in the second half of 1998. In that earlier period, exports had been driven by a marked expansion in US activity, partly the result of efforts to restore stocks of motor vehicles to more normal levels following labour disruptions. Overall, however, the favourable competitive position of Canadian industry continued to be an important factor supporting export growth. Indeed, data for July and August show a sharp acceleration in exports, consistent with the strength of US demand.
 
Because export growth was outstripped by import growth, the merchandise trade surplus, in volume terms, decreased markedly in the first half of 1999. The terms of trade improved substantially, however, mainly because of the recovery in commodity prices. Thus, the current account deficit (in dollar terms) narrowed considerably to around 1/2 per cent of GDP.
 
Wages, the largest component in the total cost of producing goods and services, have tended to rise at a somewhat higher rate in 1999. Over the first eight months of this year, annual wage settlements in the unionized private sector averaged 2.2 per cent, compared with 1.8 per cent in the second half of 1998. Public sector wage settlements averaged 1.9 per cent. The average rate of wage increases in the unionized sector was affected by substantial settlements in skilled occupations where demand is strong, such as nursing and computer technology. Statistics Canada's Labour Force Information reports that the year-over-year increase in the average hourly wage (excluding overtime) for permanent workers was 2.1 per cent in the second quarter of 1999 and 2.6 per cent in the third quarter, compared with 1.8 per cent in the fourth quarter of 1998. Thus, the underlying wage increase in the total economy was in the 2 to 2.5 per cent range.
 
This pickup in wage growth is occurring, however, at the same time as a resumption in the growth of labour productivity. Indeed, with only a modest increase in labour income per person-hour, partly because of a compositional shift towards lower-paid workers, the productivity pickup led to unit labour costs edging down on a year-over-year basis. Over time, labour income (adjusted for underlying inflation) would be expected to rise at a rate related to the trend in labour productivity growth.
 
Output grew faster in the first half of 1999 than the estimated rate of expansion in the economy's capacity to produce. As a result, the Bank's traditional estimate of the output gap - the amount of excess supply in the economy as a percentage of capacity output - narrowed from about 1.0 per cent at the end of 1998 to about 0.25 per cent at mid-1999. However, as we have emphasized before, estimates of the output gap must always be viewed cautiously. Historical data for real GDP are frequently revised. There is also a high degree of uncertainty about the effects on potential output of such factors as low inflation, large investments in technology and new machinery and equipment, and various policy measures that have made product and labour markets more flexible.
 
As outlined in the last Report, when the economy is thought to be operating near capacity, and given the uncertainty about measures of potential output and the output gap, close attention must be paid to a wide set of indicators of pressures on capacity and on inflation, including movements of core inflation relative to expectations. The indicators that have been discussed in this section do not point to any significant increase in pressures over the past six months.
 
The Bank of Canada has held the Bank Rate at 4.75 per cent since May, following three reductions over the preceding six months. There has, nevertheless, been a move upward in money market rates, reflecting actual and expected increases in US short-term interest rates as well as market sentiment that Canada would follow suit.
 
The US Federal Reserve announced quarter-point increases in its target rate for federal funds on 30 June and on 24 August, raising the rate to 5.25 per cent. These actions were taken to reduce the risk of rising inflation because demand had grown at a surprisingly rapid pace and the markets for many goods and services were already very tight. In addition, the financial strains that had prompted lower interest rates in 1998 had eased. At its 5 October meeting, the Federal Open Market Committee left the target funds rate unchanged, but indicated that it was alert for evidence of inflation pressures and that more tightening might become necessary. On this news, US market rates rose further.
 
Given the strength of spending in the United States, an increase in US short-term rates had been anticipated in bond markets, where yields had been rising since the start of the year. Medium - and longer-term interest rates continued to rise during the summer and early autumn, with yields on long-term US government bonds rising above 6 per cent. Yields in Europe have also risen, reflecting the view that economic growth there is strengthening.
 
Bond yields have increased more in Canada than in the United States, and negative spreads have largely disappeared. This increase in bond rates has also affected the mortgage market. Between May and October, the cost of 1 - and 5-year mortgages at major lending institutions in Canada increased by about 100 basis points. Demand for mortgage loans, however, has remained strong.
 
For most of the period since the last Report, the Canada/US exchange rate has tended to fluctuate in a range of 66 to 68 US cents. Wider negative short-term interest rate spreads that followed the increases in US short-term interest rates have worked against the Canadian dollar. At the same time, however, it has been supported by strengthening commodity markets and the improving current account of the balance of payments, as well as by the strong fundamentals of the Canadian economy. Over the same period, the US dollar has tended to weaken. For example, because of unexpectedly large increases in output in Japan, the yen jumped sharply. The net effect of these currency movements on the Bank's C-6 trade-weighted index for the Canadian dollar was a decline of about 2 per cent between May and October.
 
With the increase in short-term interest rates and the fluctuations in the Canadian dollar, the Bank's monetary conditions index has varied between -7.0 and -6.0 over the past six months.
 
The Bank of Canada and Canadian financial institutions have prepared thoroughly for the year-2000 date change. Systems for banking, securities, and payments have been tested extensively for compliance.
 
The Bank of Canada, like other central banks, has announced contingency arrangements for the period leading up to the transition to the new year and immediately thereafter. These measures, combined with the preparations of financial institutions, will provide Canadian households, financial institutions, and businesses with a further measure of confidence that extraordinary demands for currency or liquidity will be met, and should effectively counter unusual financial pressures.
 
Participants in the financial markets have been taking precautions to avoid technical problems, and these have been absorbed without undue strain in markets. For example, many large borrowers have switched to longer-term financing, putting some upward pressure on corporate-government yield differentials and swap spreads. In short-term money markets and derivatives markets, actions to avoid exposures during the first business days of the new year were reflected in a small increase in 3-month interbank rates at the end of September. These movements in financial market prices have not, however, been large enough to have any significant effect on economic activity. And the contingency arrangements mentioned above should prevent significant movement in interest rates in response to year-end pressures.
 
Overall, our analysis suggests that the most likely outcome over the next 18 months is for little change in core inflation. However, there are a number of risks to this projection.
 
Although growth in emerging-market economies will remain relatively weak this year, it is now expected to be stronger than originally anticipated and should pick up significantly in 2000.
 
The economic outlook for the major industrial countries is, on balance, encouraging and shows less divergence among countries than at the time of the last Report.
 
In Japan, real GDP rose considerably in the first half of 1999, partly as a result of fiscal stimulus. Nevertheless, not all indicators suggest that a sustainable recovery in private sector demand has taken hold. As a result, it will be important that economic policies continue to promote expansion.
 
Economic growth in the major European countries remained below the growth in potential output in the first half of 1999. The euro area should see some improvement over the next year and a half, chiefly reflecting the past easing in monetary conditions.
 
In the United States, the overall pace of economic expansion is expected to remain robust through year-end. However, a slowdown in economic growth to a more sustainable pace is projected starting early next year.
 
US core inflation (which excludes food and energy prices) has been close to 2 per cent in recent months. But, on balance, economic developments point to the risk of core inflation beginning to rise by early next year. These factors include continuing excess demand in labour markets, as well as supply bottlenecks in some areas, the recent depreciation of the US dollar, and rising commodity prices.
 
While easing in some world prices of commodities important for Canada is anticipated over the next few months, prices are expected to recover further during 2000 as demand continues to rise and restrictions on supply persist. By the middle of next year, crude oil prices are likely to fall back from their current high levels as major oil producers increase production.
 
Our outlook for the Canadian economy is based on the US forecast described above that involves a recovery in the second half of 1999 from the temporary slowdown in the second quarter, but then a significant easing to more sustainable growth rates in 2000.
 
Canadian exports are likely to show stronger growth in the second half of 1999, given the anticipated increase in the growth of the US economy and the recovery in commodity prices. Next year, however, export growth should ease in line with the expected slowdown of the US economy, although this should be tempered by the improved economic outlook for Europe and Japan and by Canada's strong competitiveness.
 
Import growth should also slow during the next 18 months - the result of Canada's solid competitive position and an easing in the strong demand for import-intensive goods.
 
Business investment is expected to decline slightly in the second half of 1999, following the substantial investments made this year to deal with year-2000 concerns. But investment should expand at a modest rate next year as the recovery in commodity prices improves cash flows.
 
The outlook for the growth of household spending calls for some slowing towards the end of this year, partly as a result of efforts to rebuild savings. Increased growth in household expenditures in 2000 will depend on continued gains in employment.
 
While both businesses and households might temporarily boost purchases towards the end of 1999 to minimize the effects of any supply disruptions associated with the year-2000 date change, the effects are likely to be small.
 
The latest consensus among private sector forecasters for the growth of real GDP (on an annual average basis) has been revised up significantly to 3.6 per cent this year and 2.9 per cent in 2000. At the time of the last Report, the consensus forecast was 2.8 per cent and 2.3 per cent, respectively. These trends are broadly consistent with the Bank's view, as expressed in the summer issue of our quarterly Review, that real GDP growth in 1999 would be near the top of the 2.75 to 3.75 per cent range that we projected in the May Report.
 
For next year, with a slowdown in the US economy and continued momentum of Canadian domestic demand, the Bank sees output growth in Canada in 2000 in a range of 2.75 to 3.75 per cent.
 
This projection, together with estimates of potential output using traditional techniques, would suggest that the Canadian economy would be operating at, or slightly above, full capacity in 2000. With the projected level of activity close to the economy's estimated output capacity and because capacity estimates are uncertain, the Bank has begun to put emphasis on the range of indicators discussed in Technical Box 4 in this Report to ensure a full and careful assessment of the degree of pressure on capacity and on inflation.
 
In the regular survey reported in the Conference Board's autumn Index of Business Confidence, 85 per cent of respondents expected inflation to be 2 per cent or less over the near term. The percentage of respondents anticipating inflation of 1 per cent or less has fallen sharply since last spring. As well, some 95 per cent of the firms surveyed this autumn by the Bank of Canada's regional representatives expect inflation to remain in the 1 to 3 per cent range. The average private sector forecast for CPI inflation is 1.6 per cent in 1999 and 2.0 per cent in 2000. Typical forecasts of longer-term inflation are between 1.7 and 1.9 per cent, depending on the horizon.
 
Over the past half-year, the yield differential between conventional and Real Return bonds has widened to above 2 per cent, after drifting down for several years. This widening reflected the rise in long-term nominal interest rates, since yields on Real Return Bonds have been stable. An adjustment of expectations towards the centre of the inflation-control target range might be partly responsible for this change. In any event, the differential between nominal and real rates remains generally in line with the Bank's objective of low inflation.
 
The depreciation of the Canadian dollar against the US dollar that took place from the autumn of 1997 to the autumn of 1998 is expected to continue to hold inflation up until late 2000, although at a rapidly diminishing rate. At the same time, the high rates of price reduction for long-distance telephone service and computer products that prevailed in 1998 and early 1999 are expected to slow further, moderating their influence on measured price inflation. On balance, these developments should have little net further effect on core inflation.
 
There is also a risk that the recent sharp rise in crude oil prices, as well as the substantial increases in the prices of various construction materials, may put upward pressure on items in the core CPI for which these materials constitute a significant part of total costs. The magnitude of these price-level effects would depend on the extent to which the cost changes persist, as well as on market conditions.
 
Wage increases will likely continue to edge up over the next year and a half, a view consistent with that of the firms recently surveyed by the Bank's regional representatives. However, further productivity gains are expected to keep increases in overall unit labour costs in check.
 
The price of existing housing, based on the Royal LePage index, has picked up somewhat this year with the record pace of sales. New home prices are up only slightly above their year-ago level. However, in a historical context, these indicators do not suggest a significant increase in underlying inflation pressures. The ratio of unfilled orders to shipments in the manufacturing sector (a measure for near-term core inflation) has eased after a marked pickup last year that was partly related to developments in the aircraft industry.
 
The narrow monetary aggregates have continued to grow at a pace consistent with solid economic growth and low inflation. The downward trend in M1 growth since late 1997 partly reflects the declining influence of the special factors that contributed to high M1 growth in the past few years, particularly movements of funds from non-personal notice accounts (not included in M1) into current accounts (included in M1). As a result, this year the growth rates of the broader measures of transactions money, M1+ and M1++, have been converging towards that of M1. When substitution effects are taken into account, the recent growth rate of transactions money is consistent with a growth rate of economic activity of about 3 1/2 per cent in the second half of 1999.
 
The Bank's M1-based inflation model suggests that inflation should remain within the inflation-control target range over the next couple of years.
 
The year-over-year growth rate of M2++, which is the Bank's preferred measure of broad money, has stabilized in the last few months. The decline in the growth rate from about 8 per cent in 1998 to 6 1/2 per cent currently reflects a deceleration in households' net contributions to bond and equity mutual funds. The recent growth rate of M2++ continues to point to inflation close to the midpoint of the target range over the next year.
 
With longer-term inflation expectations at 2 per cent and the economy expected to be operating at, or slightly above, estimates of capacity output, fundamental factors will be working to keep core inflation near the 2 per cent midpoint of the target range. Nonetheless, over the next year and a half, three developments are expected to contribute to moderating core inflation. First, the pass-through to inflation of the earlier depreciation of the Canadian dollar has peaked, so this source of temporary upward pressure on core inflation should diminish. Second, increases in unit labour costs are expected to be modest. Third, intense competition in the retail sector will likely continue.
 
On the other hand, two factors are expected to limit any potential decrease in core inflation during this period: the earlier substantial declines in long-distance telephone rates and computer prices should continue to slow, and the recent marked recovery in commodity prices could be a temporary source of upward pressure on non-labour costs. But with crude oil prices no longer under upward pressure, total CPI inflation will tend to move down to the core inflation rate.
 
In summary, the Bank expects core inflation to remain close to 2.0 per cent through next year. This outlook, which is broadly in line with earlier expectations, is based on two important assumptions: that the US economy achieves a more sustainable, non-inflationary growth rate, and that the path the Canadian economy follows is close to capacity output.
 
The outlook for the global economy has continued to improve since the May Report. The US economy has remained buoyant, signs of a recovery in Japan have emerged, the euro area appears to have a solid underpinning, and a number of emerging-market economies have outperformed expectations. With this international setting and with strengthening domestic demand, the Canadian economy is likely to register growth of close to 3.75 per cent on an annual average basis in 1999.
 
For 2000, the Bank now projects economic growth in a range of 2.75 to 3.75 per cent, with core inflation remaining close to the midpoint of its 1 to 3 per cent target range.
 
However, as we have pointed out in this Report, there are some important risks to this projection. These risks relate to the possibility of a stronger momentum of demand from domestic as well as international sources and of potential inflation pressures in the United States.
 
In order to preserve the low trend of inflation incorporated in this projection, the Bank must be ready to adjust monetary conditions in a timely manner. The challenge will be to assess carefully, using all available coincident and leading indicators, when adjustments are needed. Any resurgence of inflation in Canada would undermine our prospects for a durable expansion.