The global economy continues to face pervasive weak demand. While low oil prices will, over time, be a net benefit for global economic activity, the negative effects on oil producers are materializing more quickly than the positive effects on expenditures by oil consumers.
 
In the first part of 2015, global economic growth faltered. This slowdown reflects, in part, the weakness of the US economy in the early months of the year, which was the result of a combination of transitory factors and some loss of momentum. The Chinese economy is slowing amid an ongoing process of rebalancing to a more sustainable growth path. At the same time, oil-exporting countries have had to adjust to the deterioration in their terms of trade. In the euro area, a tentative recovery continues, despite the uncertainty associated with Greece. Financial conditions remain accommodative globally and should continue to provide much-needed support to economic activity. Global growth should strengthen over the second half of 2015, averaging about 3 per cent for the year.
 
Accommodative monetary policy, gradually dissipating headwinds and progress on structural reforms will help support economic activity. The Bank expects global growth to pick up to just above 3 1/2 per cent in 2016 and 2017.
 
Central banks have maintained a highly accommodative monetary policy stance, consistent with widespread economic slack, and, in some cases, they have eased policy further since April. Underlying inflationary pressures remain subdued in light of persistent excess capacity, particularly in the labour markets of a number of advanced economies, where wage growth remains weak. However, downward pressure on total CPI inflation has been moderating globally as the temporary disinflationary impact of lower oil and food prices dissipates. In this context, acute concerns over the risk of deflation in the euro area have eased.
 
Despite the significant easing in monetary policy across much of the global economy since the beginning of the year, long-term government bond yields have increased sharply since April in a number of advanced economies, returning to levels observed in the fourth quarter of 2014. This rise in long-term yields was driven in large part by higher term premiums, while expected inflation, as measured by break-even inflation rates, has remained stable. Market participants view the backup in yields as a reflection of better-than-expected economic data in the euro area, a lower risk of deflation and some technical factors. More recently, yields have stabilized in response to rising safe-haven flows associated with the stock market decline in China and uncertainty over developments in Greece. Sovereign bond spreads between peripheral and core members of the euro area have widened modestly, although the broader market reaction has so far been relatively muted. Credit spreads for both investment-grade and high-yield issuers are also slightly wider since April.
 
Equity prices in North America, Europe and a number of emerging markets in addition to China have also declined. Volatility in most asset classes has edged up, returning to historical averages. Notwithstanding these recent developments, global financial conditions continue to provide significant support to global economic activity.
 
The US economy stumbled in the first quarter of 2015. A number of factors were responsible for the setback, including temporary disruptions to activity from severe weather and the West Coast port strike, the drag on net exports from a strong US dollar, and the negative impact of the oil price shock on investment.
 
Since the United States is a net importer of oil, the decline in oil prices is expected to have a net benefit on its economy, even though investment in the US energy sector has contracted sharply. In the United States, in contrast to Canada, lower oil prices have contributed to an improvement in the terms of trade, which is providing a boost to real gross domestic income. Despite the increase in household real disposable income resulting from lower gasoline prices, the response of US consumer spending to this windfall has been sluggish. As consumers increasingly perceive the decline in gasoline prices to be durable, they are more likely to increase their spending. The recent surge in motor vehicle sales and, more broadly, the momentum in retail sales are positive signs that this is starting to occur. This rise in consumer spending, combined with positive indicators of activity in the housing sector and non-residential construction, suggest a notable rebound in growth in the second quarter.
 
As consumption increasingly responds to low oil prices and the effects of one-off factors dissipate, US economic growth is expected to be solid over the second half of the year and through the projection horizon. Moreover, the fundamentals underpinning domestic demand remain favourable. For more than a year, employment growth has averaged close to 250,000 jobs a month and labour market slack has been diminishing. Meanwhile, consumer confidence has returned to pre-crisis levels and, in conjunction with robust growth in real disposable income and accommodative financial conditions, is expected to support strong consumption and a recovery in the housing market. Residential investment should also continue to strengthen, in line with an increase in the rate of new household formation. Strong domestic demand and healthy firm balance sheets should provide support to business investment. Nevertheless, the past appreciation of the US dollar is expected to restrain US growth.
 
Notwithstanding the anticipated pickup in growth, the much weaker first quarter of 2015, as well as softer-than-expected consumer spending entering the second quarter, leaves the outlook for growth below that anticipated at the time of the April Report.
 
In other major advanced economies, the recovery is proceeding gradually. In the euro area, low oil prices, ongoing monetary policy easing and the past depreciation of the euro are supporting growth. However, persistent headwinds, including high levels of unemployment, weak credit growth, ongoing deleveraging and underlying structural deficiencies, continue to weigh on prospects for a more robust recovery. In Japan, although economic activity in the first quarter was considerably stronger than anticipated, consumption and wage growth remain muted, and inflation has been stubbornly weak.
 
Given that countries are at different stages of recovery, financial markets expect monetary policies in the major advanced economies to follow divergent paths: only the US Federal Reserve is expected to tighten its monetary stance in the near future. Consequently, the US dollar has appreciated against most major currencies. The higher US dollar is helping to rebalance global economic activity by enhancing the export competitiveness of slower-growing regions.
 
Growth in China fell below 6 per cent in the first quarter on a seasonally adjusted basis as restrictions on local government credit, the correction in the housing market and weak exports weighed on activity. Growth is expected to improve through the remainder of the year as exports strengthen, the housing market correction runs its course and targeted stimulus measures provide some support to activity. Since there is considerable uncertainty around the timing and impact of each of these developments, the authorities' stated growth target of approximately 7 per cent for 2015 is at risk. The sharp correction in major Chinese stock indexes in recent weeks reflects, in part, these concerns and could have broader negative effects on confidence.
 
Through 2016 and 2017, the managed slowing of economic growth in China is expected to continue as the authorities rebalance the economy away from investment and address financial vulnerabilities. This process will be protracted and challenging and could involve some volatility along the adjustment path while authorities formulate and implement structural reform policies.
 
Weaker activity in China in early 2015 contributed to a slowdown in growth across emerging-market economies.  In emerging Asia, softer growth in China has mainly been felt through trade channels. Other emerging markets, including Brazil, have been negatively affected by both subdued exports and declines in their terms of trade. Structural bottlenecks also continue to weigh on growth throughout the emerging world. Over the projection horizon, low oil prices and the implementation of structural reforms should support growth among oil-importing emerging markets.
 
In many oil-exporting economies, economic growth slowed or contracted in early 2015 while lower oil prices worked their way through terms-of-trade, investment and government revenue channels - effects that were exacerbated in some instances by geopolitical tensions. Growth in these economies is expected to recover in 2016-17 as the drag from lower oil prices on oil exporters dissipates. Nonetheless, low oil prices in comparison with mid-2014 will result in a persistently softer level of activity in oil-exporting economies.
 
Robust growth in the supply of non-energy commodities amid subdued global demand has contributed to a period of steady decline in the Bank's non-energy commodity price index in recent years. In particular, the slowdown in China's housing market since mid-2014 has weighed on demand for base metals. Expectations of a steady improvement in the US housing market have provided some support to lumber prices in recent months, and prices for agricultural products have surged, with higher hog prices and deteriorating supply prospects for key grains. Taking these developments together, the non-energy commodity price index is little changed since the April Report.
 
The Bank is assuming that prices of non-energy commodities will remain near their recent levels, subject to largely offsetting forces. On the upside, the anticipated pickup in global economic activity should support demand, with a material strengthening in demand for non-energy commodities hinging on the prospects for growth among large consumers of commodities such as China and other emerging-market economies. On the downside, for some non-energy commodities, the considerable expansion of global production capacity in recent years could put further downward pressure on prices. Relatively low oil prices are also reducing the costs of production for many commodities, which could support supply growth.
 
Oil prices strengthened through May as the effects of the sharp drop in prices on both demand and supply began to materialize. In response to low oil prices, gasoline demand and refining activity increased, and there are indications that China accelerated its stockpiling activity. As well, colder-than-normal weather in early 2015 temporarily increased the demand for oil. On the supply side, US shale production levelled off in April after rising steadily since 2010 and is expected to decline in the second half of 2015, reflecting a sharp drop in the number of active drilling rigs since November 2014. Ongoing geopolitical tensions in the Middle East and disruptions at Libyan ports added to the upward pressure on oil prices.
 
The price for Western Canada Select also strengthened relative to global benchmarks over this period, driven by temporary disruptions in oil sands production. WCS prices should continue to benefit from increased demand in response to added transportation and refinery capacity for Canadian heavy oil.
 
Very recently, global oil prices have fallen back toward levels assumed in the April Report, driven by uncertainty regarding developments in Greece and Chinese equity markets, ongoing excess supply, and the prospect of additional Iranian oil exports returning to the market.
 
By convention, the Bank assumes that energy prices will remain near levels observed over recent weeks. The US-dollar per barrel prices for Brent, West Texas Intermediate and WCS have averaged roughly $65, $60 and $50, respectively, since the end of May. The prices received by North American producers are $10-$15 higher than assumed at the time of the April Report, but about $50 below their peaks in June 2014.
 
There are both upside and downside risks to the Bank's oil price assumptions. On the upside, reduced investment in new production capacity is expected to constrain future supply growth, while oil demand is anticipated to be supported by stronger global activity. This upside risk is limited, however, by ongoing cost-cutting initiatives and technological advances, which are continuing to lower the oil supply cost curve while also increasing the resilience of unconventional oil production, such as shale oil, to low oil prices. On the downside, inventories are high, global production is still very strong, and there is potential for some members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries to raise supply.
 
The Bank's commodity price index is roughly unchanged from the April Report and is still low compared with the levels observed over the post recession period.
 
The setback in global activity in the first quarter had important implications for Canada. The Bank's foreign activity measure, which captures the composition of foreign demand for Canadian exports, slowed significantly in the first quarter of 2015 in response to the front-loaded and negative effects of the oil price decline on US investment, as well as the West Coast port strike. The measure is estimated to have bounced back in the second quarter, driven mainly by the rebound in non-residential construction and, to a lesser extent, US consumption, particularly motor vehicle sales. Over the remainder of 2015 and through 2016-17, Canadian exports should benefit from the growing strength of Canada's major trading partner, the United States.
 
By convention, the Canadian dollar is assumed to be close to its recent average level of 80 cents over the projection horizon, similar to the 79 cents assumed in the April Report.
 
Total CPI inflation has remained around 1 per cent in recent months, reflecting year-over-year price declines for gasoline and other consumer energy products. Core inflation as measured by CPIX has been slightly above 2 per cent, since the disinflationary pressures from economic slack are being offset by the transitory effects of the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar and some sector-specific factors. Setting aside these transitory effects, the Bank judges that the underlying trend in inflation is about 1.5 to 1.7 per cent.
 
The Canadian economy continues to undergo complex adjustments that are expected to play out over the next few years. Aggregate growth is reflecting economic activity that is progressing along two different tracks. On the first track, the resource sector is restructuring in response to the drop in oil prices since last summer, as well as the decline in other commodity prices that began several years ago. The second track is occurring outside of the resource sector, where ongoing moderate growth is being underpinned by solid Canadian household spending and the recovery of the US economy. As the second track gains strength and Canadian producers benefit from the depreciation of the Canadian dollar, it should re-emerge as the dominant one.
 
Real GDP in Canada is now estimated to have contracted modestly in the first half of 2015, resulting in a marked increase in excess capacity and additional downward pressure on inflation. A significant part of the weakness is related to the oil price shock, although non-energy goods exports fell as well. While some of the export weakness can be explained by the temporary pause in US activity earlier this year and a drop in production in response to low prices for non-energy commodities, the extent of the weakness is puzzling.
 
The Bank expects real GDP growth to resume in the third quarter. While business investment in the energy sector will likely contract further, growth will be supported by a partial recovery in exports and by federal fiscal stimulus, which should boost consumption. Starting in the fourth quarter, real GDP growth is expected to exceed potential as the drag from the resource sector dissipates and the recovery in the non-resource sector strengthens.
 
On an average annual basis, real GDP is projected to grow by just over 1 per cent in 2015 and about 2 1/2 per cent in 2016 and 2017. With this growth profile, the Canadian economy returns to potential in the first half of 2017, slightly later than anticipated in April.
 
The Bank's estimate of economic output in 2015 has been marked down considerably since the April Report, owing in part to the weakness in exports. In addition, energy firms have downgraded their investment intentions, since they now expect lower oil prices to be more persistent.
 
Total CPI inflation is projected to rise to about 2 per cent in 2016 once the temporary effect of lower energy prices disappears from the inflation data. Core inflation will be close to 2 per cent over the projection period, with the upward pressure from the pass-through effects of the lower dollar largely offsetting the disinflationary effects of economic slack. The Bank expects that inflation will return to 2 per cent on a sustained basis in the first half of 2017 as the economy reaches and remains at full capacity.
 
Persistent economic slack and the drop in energy prices continue to weigh on inflation in Canada. Total CPI inflation has remained around 1 per cent in recent months, reflecting year-over-year declines in prices for gasoline and other consumer energy products.
 
In contrast, core inflation as measured by CPIX has been slightly above 2 per cent, boosted by the pass-through effects of the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar and some sector-specific factors, which have offset the disinflationary force from slack in the economy. Although the impact of pass-through is difficult to gauge precisely, the Bank estimates that it is currently raising CPIX inflation by about 0.4 to 0.6 percentage points.  The underlying trend in inflation is assessed to be 1.5 to 1.7 per cent, a bit lower than in the April Report, consistent with material and increased slack in the Canadian economy.
 
The fall in oil prices since the middle of last year had an immediate and marked impact on Canada's terms of trade and real gross domestic income and subsequently on real economic activity in the first half of 2015. About one-third of the income gains associated with the commodity price increases since early 2002 have been reversed. Of the various components of income, corporate profits have so far borne the brunt of the shock, with profits declining by almost 15 per cent since the third quarter of 2014.
 
Developments in the resource sector - the first growth track - were the primary source of weakness in the first half of the year, although a temporary faltering of US activity also restrained growth. Business investment plunged 16 per cent in the first quarter and was the main contributor to the 0.6 per cent decline in real GDP. The pullback in business investment was particularly pronounced in components that are heavily weighted toward the oil and gas sector. The Bank estimates that economic activity contracted further, by about half a per cent, in the second quarter. Total business investment is estimated to have declined sharply in the quarter as investment in the oil and gas sector continues to retrench, in line with recent industry announcements. Exports also appear to have contracted, with persistently low non-energy commodity prices leading some firms to curtail production, while non-commodity goods exports have lost momentum. As of May, for example, intermediate metal products and industrial machinery, equipment and parts (two of the export categories expected to lead the recovery and that registered strong growth in 2014) had contracted by about 20 per cent and 5 per cent, respectively, since the beginning of the year.
 
Activity in the non-resource sector - the second growth track - has been firmer. Consumption growth is expected to pick up in the second quarter. In particular, sales of motor vehicles rebounded strongly following harsh weather conditions that depressed sales earlier in the year. Viewed through the two-track lens, real GDP outside the resource industries has continued to expand at a moderate pace, while resource industries have contracted.
 
Adjustments to commodity price declines are playing out differently across regions. Overall, household spending has held up, in part because aggregate household income has continued to grow, despite the decline in real GDI. While income from wages and salaries in mining, oil and gas extraction is down by almost 3 per cent since the third quarter of 2014, growth in wage income outside this sector has been comparable to that observed before the fall in oil prices. In the oil-producing provinces, households have begun to curtail their expenditures. Sales of existing homes and new motor vehicles in these provinces are down by more than 15 per cent since last November, in contrast to modest increases at the national level.
 
The Bank's two measures of the output gap indicate that slack in the Canadian economy increased by about 1 percentage point through the first half of 2015. The statistical measure is estimated to have widened to -1.3 per cent in the second quarter, while the structural measure suggests excess capacity of 2.2 per cent.
 
The labour market is undergoing a significant adjustment in response to the oil price shock. While the national unemployment rate has remained unchanged at 6.8 per cent in recent months, the provincial rate has increased significantly in the oil-producing provinces, and further job losses in oil and related industries are anticipated. The Bank's summer Business Outlook Survey finds fewer firms reporting labour shortages. As well, the BOS indicator of labour shortage intensity is at its lowest level since the second quarter of 2010. With the fall in employment in the oil-producing provinces, interprovincial commuting and migration have also declined from recent high levels. As a result, labour supply has increased elsewhere in the country, and reports of shortages of skilled labour have abated in some provinces. These developments are consistent with ongoing material slack in the labour market.
 
In this context, overall labour market conditions have held up reasonably well. The Bank's labour market indicator has edged down, reflecting improvements in a range of labour market variables, including long-term unemployment, prime-age participation and wage growth.
 
Meanwhile, pressures on physical capacity appear to be building in some regions and sectors - as would be expected at this stage in the recovery from a destructive recession. The summer Business Outlook Survey finds that a greater number of firms are operating at close to capacity, with 47 per cent saying they would have some or significant difficulty responding to an unexpected increase in demand. Firms most often cited physical bottlenecks as the main obstacle to scaling up their production. Increased capacity pressures should eventually be a catalyst for stronger business investment.
 
Overall, the Bank judges that the amount of excess capacity widened in the second quarter, to between 1 1/4 and 2 1/4 per cent.
 
Financial conditions continue to be easier than before the January reduction in the target for the overnight rate and are providing support to economic activity.
 
Canadian government bond yields have stayed relatively low and stable at short - and medium-term maturities. However, long-term yields have moved higher, along with global rates. Nevertheless, effective borrowing rates for households and firms have remained close to historical lows.
 
Overall credit conditions continue to be very supportive of activity. The Bank's Senior Loan Officer Survey reports that business-lending conditions were broadly unchanged during the second quarter of 2015, with both price and non-price conditions basically the same as in the first quarter. The results of the Business Outlook Survey, meanwhile, suggest an easing in credit conditions in the second quarter, marking the sixth consecutive quarter in which firms reported a net easing in terms and conditions.
 
In the context of stimulative financial conditions, business credit growth has increased in recent months. The growth rate of household credit has remained close to 5 per cent since the end of 2014, slightly stronger than the growth of disposable income.
 
The Bank anticipates that the non-resource track for growth will begin to dominate in the third quarter and that the economy will expand by roughly 1 1/2 per cent. Consumption is expected to accelerate as household disposable income receives a boost from retroactive federal payments to families with children. Importantly, exports are projected to return to solid growth, supported by continued improvements in US demand and a rebound in automotive exports following temporary shutdowns for retooling at the beginning of the year. Business investment will remain a source of drag, however, as the energy sector continues to adjust to low oil prices.
 
Many indicators point to a return to growth in the third quarter. Outside the oil-producing provinces, consumer confidence remains high and labour markets continue to improve. Gains in non-resource employment have averaged almost 20,000 jobs per month since the beginning of the year. Recent survey data suggest that manufacturing activity has picked up, and firms indicated that foreign demand was improving. In addition, results from the Business Outlook Survey point to rising capacity pressures among manufacturers, as many businesses plan to increase their investment and employment to address capacity constraints. This is reinforced by evidence that manufacturing firms have increased their borrowing, which may be a precursor to an expansion in capacity.
 
Beginning in the fourth quarter of this year, real GDP is projected to grow above potential as the non-resource sector gains strength and the negative effects of the oil price shock on growth dissipate. Solid household spending will be supplemented by a continued recovery in non-energy exports and investment. An important sign that the natural sequence of stronger foreign demand, exports, confidence, investment and employment is taking hold is firm creation, which is now above its post-crisis average. Notably, year-over-year growth in the number of manufacturing firms turned positive in first quarter of 2015 for the first time since 2008.
 
Looking through month-to-month  volatility, energy exports continue to grow. In contrast, non-energy goods exports have lost momentum, owing in part to softer foreign demand and reduced supply in response to low commodity prices. The decline in exports appears larger than can be explained by these factors alone. The Bank's base-case projection assumes that this unexplained weakness is temporary and that the relationship between exports and foreign activity will reassert itself in the coming quarters. As in the past, the Bank's export projection is nevertheless conservative, taking into account the underperformance of the sector in recent years.
 
More precisely, exports are anticipated to regain momentum in the second half of the year as US private domestic demand regains strength, energy-production capacity comes back online and additional capacity is added, and global demand growth picks up. Moreover, the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar has improved the competitiveness of Canadian producers. While the timing and magnitude of the benefits of the lower dollar will differ across exporters, export categories that have historically been more sensitive to exchange rate movements are already showing stronger activity than other categories. Examples of export categories that show particular sensitivity to exchange rates include building and packaging materials, furniture and fixtures, clothing and textile products, and large motor vehicles (e.g., heavy trucks and buses). Exports of services, which constitute about 15 per cent of total exports and are benefiting from the lower Canadian dollar, have accelerated, with year-over-year growth picking up from about 1 per cent in the beginning of 2013 to about 3 per cent in recent quarters. The acceleration has been particularly pronounced for exports of travel services.
 
The Bank's projection for exports is supported by results from the summer Business Outlook Survey: many firms, particularly in the manufacturing sector, noted that stronger US growth prospects have translated into an improved sales outlook. Moreover, some exporters cited the lower Canadian dollar as having a positive impact on sales volumes. The results of the Spring 2015 Trade Confidence Index survey conducted by Export Development Canada provide corroborating evidence that the positive effects of the lower dollar for Canadian exporters are becoming more evident.
 
The Bank's projection for investment growth in the coming quarters has been revised downward, reflecting developments on the resource track. Based on industry announcements of capital expenditure plans, the Bank now estimates that investment in the oil and gas sector will contract by close to 40 per cent this year, compared with an earlier estimate of about 30 per cent. Discussions with energy firms suggest that this revision primarily reflects lower expectations about the future path of oil prices. The outlook for investment in this sector remains highly uncertain, particularly for large-scale projects with long investment horizons, given the challenges in predicting returns and the risks associated with forecasting future oil prices. Weaker investment in the oil and gas industry will also constrain investment demand in industries linked to the energy sector. In addition, softer foreign demand and low commodity prices are leading firms in non-energy commodity industries to further delay or curtail investment spending.
 
Business investment growth outside the energy sector is likely to be subdued in the near term, owing to ongoing uncertainty about the resilience of demand, some remaining excess capacity in a few manufacturing sectors, and developments in commodity-extraction  and related industries. Results of the summer Business Outlook Survey suggest that firms continue to wait for signs of a sustained pickup in demand before increasing investment; concerns about both domestic and foreign demand remain the most important factor cited by firms as restraining their investment.
 
Financial conditions continue to be favourable for investment spending, even though the weaker Canadian dollar has raised the cost of imported machinery and equipment. At the same time, the dollar's depreciation in the wake of the decline in commodity prices has had mixed effects on margins and corporate cash flow. For many exporters, the lower exchange rate has boosted margins and cash flow expressed in Canadian dollars, which have provided a source of funds that could enable an expansion in investment spending. In contrast, for domestic firms with relatively higher import content in their production processes, the higher Canadian-dollar cost of imports is potentially squeezing margins and cash flow.
 
Overall, as US demand growth becomes more durable and non-energy exports regain momentum, business confidence will likely strengthen and the natural sequence will reassert itself. A pickup in business investment growth should follow as firms look to increase capacity to meet stronger domestic and foreign demand. In this sequence, investment in machinery and equipment is expected to be the main source of growth in business spending, supported by robust demand in the manufacturing sector and favourable financing conditions.
 
Household expenditures are expected to continue to grow at a moderate pace over the projection period. Regional divergences are evident as energy firms continue to adjust their employment in response to lower oil prices. Weaker employment in the oil-producing provinces will weigh on income, consumption and housing activity in those areas. Once the downward adjustment to production and employment in the oil sector is complete, the Bank anticipates that growth differentials will narrow across regions.
 
Heading into 2016, improving labour market conditions will support consumer spending, with consumption expected to grow at roughly the same rate as disposable income. As a result, the savings rate is expected to remain relatively stable at above pre-crisis levels.
 
Housing market activity varies across provinces. Both new construction and resale activity are very strong in British Columbia and Ontario, while they remain low in Quebec and the Atlantic provinces. The strength in British Columbia and Ontario appears to reflect local demand stimulated by historically low interest rates, as well as demand from foreign investors and recent immigrants. In contrast, weakness in the resource economy is affecting housing activity in the Prairie provinces, where resale activity has pulled back sharply in the past six months, and new construction has also begun to slow. In the near term, the shift in interprovincial migration flows in response to the oil price shock could reinforce some of the recent divergence in housing market activity across provinces. The Bank continues to anticipate a constructive evolution in the housing market, with housing activity expected to moderate over 2015 before stabilizing through 2016 and 2017 as the economy gains strength and household borrowing rates begin to normalize.
 
Core inflation is expected to remain near 2 per cent throughout the projection period as the upward pressures from exchange rate pass-through largely offset downward pressures from excess supply. Based on the assumption of a Canadian dollar at 80 cents US, the Bank estimates that the effects from exchange rate pass-through peak at 0.4 to 0.6 percentage points in the third quarter of 2015 before gradually fading through the end of 2016.
 
The trajectory for core inflation is little changed from April, since the additional downward pressures on inflation from a wider output gap are largely offset by an upward revision to the estimated impact from exchange rate pass-through.
 
Total CPI inflation is expected to remain below 2 per cent until early 2016, reflecting weak year-over-year gasoline price inflation. Thereafter, total CPI inflation will converge to and track the projection for core inflation. Once the economy reaches and stabilizes at full capacity in the first half of 2017, total CPI inflation and core inflation will remain at 2 per cent on a sustained basis.
 
Medium-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored at 2 per cent. The June Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation for 2016 is unchanged from April, at 2.1 per cent. The forecast for 2015 is 1.1 per cent, close to recent inflation data. Results from the summer Business Outlook Survey show that almost all firms anticipate that total CPI inflation will be within the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range over the next two years. The survey finding that roughly two-thirds of firms anticipate that total CPI inflation will be in the bottom half of the range reflects the evolution of energy prices: many firms cited weaker oil prices as the main driver of their inflation expectations.
 
Based on the past dispersion of private sector forecasts, a reasonable range around the base-case projection for total CPI inflation is ±0.3 percentage points.  This range is intended to convey a sense of forecast uncertainty. Fan charts, which are derived using statistical analysis of the Bank's forecast errors, provide a complementary perspective.
 
The outlook for inflation is subject to several risks emanating from both the external environment and the domestic economy. The Bank judges that the risks to the projected path for inflation are roughly balanced.
 
The most important risks to inflation are the following:
 
Based largely on industry announcements of capital expenditure plans, the Bank projects a substantial decline in investment in the oil and gas sector in 2015. However, considerable uncertainty remains around the future path for oil prices and how firms' investment plans will evolve as they adapt their business models to a low-price environment. In particular, if prices remain at current low levels for an extended period, or fall further, firms may adjust their spending plans downward yet again.
 
After a broad-based pickup in 2014, non-energy goods exports have fallen since the beginning of this year, with some export categories that are expected to lead the recovery failing to regain momentum. The underperformance of these categories may merely reflect data volatility and longer lags in the effects of the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar against the US dollar. However, it could also be indicative of more fundamental competitiveness challenges. For example, Canadian competitiveness in the US market may not have improved relative to exporters from regions such as Mexico and the euro area, whose currencies have also depreciated against the US dollar. Firms may also be responding to greater foreign demand by expanding their offshore production capacity.
 
In addition, a slowdown in China's economy that is more pronounced than expected and the corresponding spillovers to China's trading partners would affect Canada, not only through the demand for Canadian exports, but also through the downward pressure it would put on commodity prices.
 
Weaker exports and commodity prices would also have negative implications for business investment.
 
Housing activity registered stronger-than-expected growth in the first quarter of 2015, especially in the Greater Toronto and Vancouver areas, and recent indicators suggest continued momentum. Persistent strength in housing would provide a near-term boost to economic activity, but it would also further exacerbate existing imbalances in the household sector and increase the likelihood and potential severity of a correction later on. In addition, the vulnerability associated with household indebtedness remains important and is expected to edge higher in the near term in response to the ongoing negative impact on incomes from the sharp decline in oil prices and a projected increase in the level of household debt. Although the most likely scenario is one in which these imbalances unwind gradually as the economic recovery gains traction, a disorderly unwinding, should it materialize, could have sizable negative effects on the economy.
 
Stronger-than-expected private domestic demand in the United States represents an important upside risk to inflation in Canada. The US labour market has improved significantly over the past year. Together with high levels of consumer confidence and the boost from lower oil prices, this could generate an acceleration in household spending. This increased demand would encourage businesses to raise hiring and investment, sparking a virtuous circle of higher US private domestic demand. Robust US activity would generate positive spillovers to growth in the rest of the world, supporting the recovery in the euro area, boosting global confidence more generally and raising demand for Canada's non-energy exports.