Global growth prospects have weakened since April. While the economic expansion in the United States continues at a gradual but somewhat slower pace, developments in Europe point to a renewed contraction. In China and other emerging economies, the deceleration in growth has been greater than anticipated, reflecting past policy tightening and weaker external demand. This slowdown in global activity has led to a sizable reduction in commodity prices, although they remain elevated. The combination of increasing global excess capacity over the projection horizon and reduced commodity prices is expected to moderate global inflationary pressures. Global financial conditions have also deteriorated since April, with periods of considerable volatility. The Bank's base-case projection assumes that the European crisis will continue to be contained, although this assumption is subject to downside risks.
 
While global headwinds are restraining Canadian economic activity, domestic factors are expected to support moderate growth in Canada. The Bank expects the economy to grow at a pace roughly in line with its production potential in the near term, before picking up through 2013. Consumption and business investment are expected to be the primary drivers of growth, reflecting very stimulative domestic financial conditions. However, their pace will be influenced by external headwinds, notably the effects of lower commodity prices on Canadian incomes and wealth, as well as by record-high household debt. Housing activity is expected to slow from record levels. Government spending is not projected to contribute to growth in 2012 and to contribute only modestly thereafter, in line with plans to consolidate spending by federal and provincial governments. Canadian exports are projected to remain below their pre-recession peak until the beginning of 2014, reflecting the dynamics of foreign demand and ongoing competitiveness challenges, including the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar.
 
The Bank projects that the economy will grow by 2.1 per cent in 2012, 2.3 per cent in 2013 and 2.5 per cent in 2014. The economy is expected to reach full capacity in the second half of 2013, thus operating with a small amount of slack for somewhat longer than previously anticipated.
 
Core inflation is forecast to remain around 2 per cent over the projection horizon as the economy operates near its production potential, growth in labour compensation stays moderate and inflation expectations remain well anchored. Given the recent drop in gasoline prices and with futures prices suggesting persistently lower oil prices, the Bank expects total CPI inflation to remain noticeably below the 2 per cent target over the coming year before returning to target around mid-2013.
 
The inflation outlook in Canada is subject to significant risks.
 
The three main upside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the possibility of higher global inflationary pressures, stronger Canadian exports and stronger momentum in Canadian household spending.
 
The three main downside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the European crisis, weaker global momentum and the possibility that growth in Canadian household spending could be weaker.
 
Overall, the Bank judges that the risks to the inflation outlook in Canada are roughly balanced over the projection period. Reflecting all of these factors, on 17 July, the Bank decided to maintain the target for the overnight rate at 1 per cent. To the extent that the economic expansion continues and the current excess supply in the economy is gradually absorbed, some modest withdrawal of the present considerable monetary policy stimulus may become appropriate, consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target over the medium term. The timing and degree of any such withdrawal will be weighed carefully against domestic and global economic developments.
 
The prospects for global economic growth have weakened since the April Monetary Policy Report. While the economic expansion in the United States continues at a gradual but somewhat slower pace, developments in the euro area point to a renewed contraction. In China and other emerging-market countries, the deceleration in economic growth has been greater than previously anticipated. This slowdown in global economic activity has led to a sizable reduction in commodity prices, although they remain elevated. Global financial conditions have deteriorated since the last Report, with periods of considerable volatility.
 
Global economic growth is expected to moderate from 3.8 per cent in 2011 to 3.1 per cent in 2012 and 2013, before rising to 3.5 per cent in 2014. Given this relatively modest growth profile, global excess capacity is expected to increase over the projection horizon. The Bank's base-case scenario assumes that the crisis in the euro area will continue to be contained, although this assumption is subject to downside risks. The projection also assumes that current legislation in the United States, which implies a severe tightening of fiscal policy at the beginning of 2013 (the so-called "fiscal cliff"), will be modified to spread the fiscal contraction over several years.
 
Underlying inflation pressures in advanced economies are expected to ease over the projection horizon in response to the considerable excess capacity. As a result, central banks in some advanced economies have provided additional monetary stimulus, either by lowering policy interest rates or by undertaking further unconventional measures. In emerging-market economies , some of the past monetary tightening is being reversed and new fiscal stimulus has been announced.
 
Global financial conditions have deteriorated since the last Report. Renewed worries about the sustainability of sovereign debt and the health of the banking sectors in some euro-area economies, as well as downward revisions to the prospects for global economic growth, have led to a significant deterioration in market sentiment. Spreads on some euro-area sovereign bonds have risen markedly over the period, with Spanish spreads relative to German bonds reaching euro-era record highs.
 
At the same time, growing investor appetite for safer and more-liquid assets has pushed government bond yields in most major advanced economies to record lows and exerted strong upward pressure on currencies such as the US dollar and the Japanese yen. The value of the euro, in contrast, has weakened noticeably and a large number of emerging-market currencies have also fallen, in response to an abrupt reversal of capital flows.
 
Other asset classes have also been affected by changes in market sentiment. Equity prices have softened in the past few months, especially bank equities. However, corporate bond issuance outside of Europe has held up relatively well and spreads are little changed from their levels at the time of the last Report.
 
Bank funding conditions have tightened in recent months, although the extent has varied across countries. Banks in a number of economies, such as the United States and the United Kingdom, have experienced a relatively modest rise in funding costs, while banks in the euro area are facing increased pressures. As a consequence, euro-area banks have continued to tighten credit conditions.
 
Developments in Europe have also affected bank lending conditions in a number of other countries. Banks in the United Kingdom have tightened lending terms on some loans to households and corporations. Although US banks have implemented a modest easing of lending standards more broadly in recent months, they have tightened standards on loans to European banks and to non-financial firms that have substantial exposure to Europe.
 
Real GDP in the euro area contracted by 1.3 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2011 and was basically unchanged in the first quarter of 2012. While GDP growth was stronger in the first quarter than anticipated in the April Report, this positive surprise is unlikely to persist, as economic conditions continue to deteriorate in many euro-area countries. With nearly half of all euro-area economies already in recession, real GDP and private domestic demand are below their pre-crisis peaks by about 2 per cent and 6 per cent, respectively. The adverse feedback loop between weakening economic activity and sovereign and banking sector vulnerabilities has intensified, rendering the task of fiscal consolidation even more challenging. Moreover, the worsening economic situation in the peripheral economies has begun to spread to the previously resilient core countries. Sentiment has deteriorated and, in June, purchasing managers' indexes were generally at a level consistent with a contraction in economic activity, even in the core economies.
 
Euro-area GDP is projected to contract in the final three quarters of 2012. A very modest recovery is expected to begin in 2013, driven largely by a strengthening in exports supported by the low level of the euro and a gradual pickup in external demand. Domestic demand is forecast to act as a drag on growth in 2013 and to expand only modestly in 2014, in response to a slight improvement in confidence and some easing in financial conditions. Relative to the April Report, growth prospects in the euro area are weaker over the entire projection horizon, owing to more restrictive financial conditions, additional fiscal austerity measures and lower confidence.
 
Despite subdued economic conditions, headline inflation in the euro area, at 2.4 per cent in June, has remained relatively elevated, partly reflecting increases in indirect taxes and administered prices. Underlying inflation pressures are expected to moderate over the projection horizon, owing to the impact of growing unused capacity and projected declines in commodity prices, although measured inflation will be held up somewhat by the effects of additional increases in indirect taxes and administered prices.
 
European policy-makers announced a number of new initiatives on 29 June designed to reinforce the monetary union and ease borrowing conditions for sovereigns.  Timely implementation of these significant measures, together with other substantive reforms, will likely be needed to continue to contain the crisis.
 
The US economic expansion is continuing at a modest pace, with real GDP growing by 1.9 per cent in the first quarter of 2012, slightly weaker than expected at the time of the April Report. The profile for US economic growth has been revised downward over the projection horizon, reflecting a more gradual improvement in labour market conditions, weaker external demand and the recent rise in the US dollar. These influences are expected to more than offset the positive impact from the easing in US monetary policy and lower oil prices.
 
US real GDP is forecast to grow by slightly less than 2 per cent, on average, through the first half of 2013, in response to the restraining effects from fiscal consolidation, household deleveraging, modest growth in external demand and tight financial conditions. Economic growth is expected to strengthen thereafter, owing in part to a modest pickup in external demand.
 
Fiscal consolidation is expected to have a significant dampening effect on US economic growth over the projection horizon. In view of the considerable uncertainty regarding the pace of fiscal consolidation, the Bank's base-case scenario assumes that the fiscal drag will amount to roughly 1 percentage point in 2012 and 1.5 percentage points in 2013 and 2014. However, a severe tightening of fiscal policy at the beginning of 2013 (the fiscal cliff) is built into current legislation, which could reduce US real GDP growth next year by up to 4 percentage points if it is not amended.
 
In contrast, monetary policy is expected to remain highly accommodative throughout the projection horizon. The US Federal Reserve has recently lengthened the duration of its program to extend the average maturity of its holdings of securities from June 2012 to the end of the year and continues to expect that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate, at least through late 2014.
 
Growth in consumption is expected to remain modest over the projection horizon as households continue to rebuild their balance sheets in an environment of subdued labour market conditions, fiscal restraint and persistently weak house prices. The boost to real purchasing power from lower oil prices should provide some support to household spending, however.
 
The US housing market continues to be weak relative to previous recoveries. The demand for housing remains subdued in light of the tight underwriting standards for new mortgage origination, while the large overhang of unoccupied dwellings and homes in the foreclosure pipeline continues to restrain increases in both home-building and prices. Housing starts have picked up to above 700,000 units from a recessionary trough near 500,000 units, but remain well below the 1.7 million-unit average in the decade leading up to the crisis. Residential construction is expected to pick up further from these still-low levels, supported by an improvement in labour market conditions, a gradual easing in lending conditions and a reduction in the stock of vacant homes.
 
Elevated vacancy rates and tight borrowing conditions are also restraining growth in non-residential construction. A modest recovery is projected to unfold in this sector beginning in 2013, as the effects from these factors gradually dissipate.
 
Growth in business investment in 2012 is projected to be somewhat constrained by uncertainty stemming from the fiscal debate in the United States and by the weaker global economy. Together with exports, business investment is nonetheless expected to continue to provide significant support to the US economic expansion over the projection horizon. As the situation in Europe improves and the uncertainty regarding US fiscal policy is resolved, business investment is projected to gain momentum, supported by strong corporate balance sheets and profits. Although growth in US exports is expected to decelerate during 2012, owing to the impact of slowing demand from trading partners and the past appreciation of the US real effective exchange rate, it is projected to strengthen starting in 2013 when global demand begins to recover.
 
In light of the subdued pace of the US economic expansion, the amount of excess supply in the economy is expected to remain significant through 2014 and is projected to dampen underlying inflation pressures.
 
Real GDP in Japan rose by 4.7 per cent in the first quarter of the year, significantly above expectations at the time of the April Report. The rebound in GDP growth reflects a marked increase in consumption supported by subsidies for the purchase of fuel-efficient motor vehicles, and a robust rise in public spending related to reconstruction. Exports also grew strongly, buttressed by further recovery from the impact of flooding in Thailand. With inflation remaining well below the official goal of 1 per cent, the Bank of Japan decided to expand the size of its Asset Purchase Program, postpone the targeted expiry date of the program by six months and purchase longer-dated government bonds.
 
Japan's real GDP is expected to grow at a moderate pace through 2013, supported by reconstruction activity and government stimulus programs. Growth in economic activity is projected to slow in 2014, however, owing to the drag from a planned increase in the value-added tax.  Growth in exports is projected to be restrained through 2014 by the elevated level of the yen and modest growth in foreign demand. Relative to the April Report, real GDP growth is expected to be stronger in 2012, but somewhat weaker thereafter.
 
Economic growth in China is slowing to a greater degree than anticipated at the time of the April Report. Real GDP growth moderated to 7.6 per cent on a year-over-year basis in the second quarter of 2012, the weakest result in more than three years. The past tightening in monetary and macroprudential policies has led to a broad deceleration in domestic demand, while weaker external demand, especially from Europe, has weighed on export growth. Inflation pressures are easing, with consumer price inflation falling to 2.2 per cent in June, owing mainly to a moderation in food prices. Housing prices have also continued to soften on a year-over-year basis. In light of slowing economic growth and moderating price pressures, the People's Bank of China has continued to ease monetary policy, lowering the reserve requirement ratio for financial institutions by a total of 150 basis points since December and cutting its benchmark lending interest rate by a total of 56 basis points in the past two months. The fiscal stance has also been relaxed.
 
Real GDP in China is projected to average 7.8 per cent per year through 2014. This is a somewhat weaker profile than anticipated in the April Report. Growth in exports is expected to be restrained over 2012 by weak activity in advanced economies, especially in the euro area, but is projected to pick up in late 2013 and 2014, as the external environment improves. A slow rotation of demand away from exports and toward consumption is forecast over the projection horizon, facilitated by the government's announced plan to boost household spending and by a very modest appreciation of the real effective exchange rate. As a result, some limited progress in resolving global imbalances is expected over the projection horizon.
 
In other emerging-market economies, moderating external demand, past tightening in monetary policy, pressures on financial conditions from foreign bank deleveraging and, in some cases, stalled reform efforts, have led to a progressive deceleration in economic activity. In Brazil, economic growth was close to zero in the first quarter of 2012, while growth in India was the weakest it has been in a decade. In response to reduced prospects for growth, central banks in many emerging-market economies are reversing previous policy tightening and lowering policy interest rates. New fiscal stimulus measures are also being implemented in a number of countries. Economic growth is nevertheless projected to remain relatively subdued through the first half of 2013 and then to gradually pick up as the demand for exports strengthens in advanced economies. Relative to the April Report, real GDP growth is expected to be weaker over the projection horizon, owing to lower external demand.
 
Although elevated by historical standards, the prices of many commodities have declined since the April Report, in response to weakening world economic prospects. Global oil prices have registered the largest drop, falling by about 15 per cent since April. The latest futures curve suggests that Brent crude prices will decline gradually over the projection horizon, reflecting softer demand conditions combined with expectations of robust production from countries that are not part of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries. The spread between West Texas Intermediate and Brent prices is projected to narrow from about US$16 in the second quarter of 2012 to around US$7 by the end of 2014, as additions to the pipeline network are expected to contribute to a partial resolution of oversupply conditions in the US Midwest. Relative to the April Report, oil prices are expected to be substantially weaker through 2014, largely owing to diminished prospects for global demand.
 
Although natural gas prices have rebounded since the April Report, boosted by growing demand for electricity generation, they are still very low by historical standards. Based on the latest futures curve, natural gas prices are expected to continue to rise through 2014, similar to expectations in April.
 
Prices for most non-energy commodities have declined slightly since April and are generally projected to stay marginally below the levels anticipated at the time of the last Report through 2014. Slowing growth in demand from China and the situation in the euro area have put significant downward pressure on the prices of base metals, which is expected to continue until early 2013.
 
Prices for base metals are then projected to increase slowly, supported by the pickup in global economic growth. As recent severe weather conditions have reduced supply, prices for agricultural products are expected to remain elevated for the remainder of 2012 and to decline thereafter. Owing to the gradual pace of the recovery in the US housing sector and a moderation in demand from China, prices for forestry products are expected to remain weak over the projection horizon.
 
Demand for Canada's exports remains modest: the foreign activity measure has recovered only slightly more than half of the decline recorded during the 2008-09 recession, largely owing to the weak US recovery. The foreign activity measure is expected to grow steadily over the projection horizon and to outpace the growth in trade-weighted foreign GDP as well as US GDP, reflecting sustained momentum in US business investment spending and a gradual recovery in the US housing market from depressed levels. The measure is projected to surpass its pre-recession level during the second half of 2013. Relative to the April Report, the expected profile of the foreign activity measure is nonetheless lower through 2014, with the downward revision to the outlook for global economic growth partly offset by the slightly more favourable composition of US demand.
 
The methodology used to compute the Bank of Canada's commodity price index has recently been improved to incorporate more accurate commodity weights and an expanded basket of benchmark oil prices to better measure the prices received by Canadian oil producers. These modifications highlight the growing share of crude oil output and the shift away from natural gas in the total value of Canadian commodity production.
 
Based on the new methodology, the BCPI has declined by approximately 6 per cent since April. Prices for Western Canada Select have fallen by 22 per cent since the April Report, a larger decline than in global prices, as strong growth in production and temporary refinery and pipeline outages have led to excess supply. These developments have caused a deterioration in Canada's terms of trade. Over the projection horizon, the BCPI is expected to increase, reflecting a sustained rise in natural gas prices and a slight narrowing of the gap between the price for Brent crude and North American crude oil benchmarks. This is expected to have a positive impact on Canada's terms of trade.
 
The Canadian dollar has averaged 98 cents US since the June fixed announcement date and is assumed to remain at this level over the projection horizon, compared with the 101 cents US assumed in the April Report.
 
While global headwinds are restraining Canadian economic activity, domestic factors are expected to support moderate growth in Canada. The Bank expects the Canadian economy to grow at a pace roughly in line with its production potential in the near term, before picking up through 2013. The Bank continues to anticipate that, over the projection horizon, the expansion will be driven mainly by growth in consumption and business investment, reflecting very stimulative domestic financial conditions. Housing activity is expected to slow from record levels. Canadian exports are projected to remain below their pre-recession peak until the beginning of 2014, reflecting the dynamics of foreign demand and ongoing competitiveness challenges, including the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar.
 
This outlook for the Canadian economy is weaker over the near term than anticipated in the April Report. The projected growth in household expenditures and business investment has been revised somewhat lower, largely owing to the reintensification of external headwinds, notably the effects of lower commodity prices on Canadian incomes and wealth. The projected growth in exports is also weaker than in the April Report, in line with the more subdued outlook for foreign demand. As a result, the Canadian economy is expected to continue to operate with a small amount of slack for somewhat longer than previously anticipated.
 
The Bank continues to forecast that core inflation will remain around 2 per cent over the projection horizon as the economy operates near its production potential, the growth of labour compensation stays moderate and inflation expectations remain well anchored. Reflecting lower prices for gasoline, total CPI inflation is expected to remain noticeably below the 2 per cent target over the coming year, before returning to target around mid-2013.
 
Despite the deterioration in global financial conditions, the supply and price of credit for businesses and households in Canada remain very stimulative, providing important ongoing support to the economic expansion.
 
Canadian financial markets have remained resilient in recent months, although they have been affected by heightened risk aversion and volatility in global markets. Most notably, the S&P/TSX Composite Index has declined by roughly 10 per cent from its first-quarter peak and volatility has increased. Credit spreads on Canadian corporate bonds have also widened somewhat, although all-in yields have fallen as yields on Canadian government bonds have declined to record lows, and the volume of bond issuance has remained robust.
 
Canadian banks continue to be well positioned to lend, with ready access to relatively low-cost funding across the term structure in both Canadian and foreign currencies. The Bank's latest Senior Loan Officer Survey and the balance of opinion of Canadian firms surveyed in the Bank's summer Business Outlook Survey together suggested little change in business lending conditions in recent months, following several quarters of persistent easing.
 
In the context of these broadly favourable financing conditions for Canadian firms, the growth of overall business credit has picked up to a rate above its historical average. Growth in short-term business credit has been particularly strong, while growth in long-term business credit has remained moderate. These developments are consistent with the ongoing solid growth in business investment and the ample availability of internal funds owing to the strong balance-sheet positions of non-financial firms.
 
Although household credit also continues to be readily available at near-record low rates, the pace of growth in household credit has slowed somewhat since the latter part of 2011. Nonetheless, this follows an extended period of rapid growth in household credit, and the particularly strong activity in the housing market seen early in 2012 suggests some re-acceleration in mortgage credit in the near term.
 
Compared with the unusually rapid pace observed in late 2011, growth in the narrow monetary aggregates has moderated in recent months, consistent with reduced liquidity preference. Growth in the broad monetary aggregates has been moderate over the same period, suggesting relatively subdued inflation pressures ahead.
 
The Canadian economy continues to operate with a small amount of spare capacity. Real GDP grew by 1.9 per cent in the first quarter of 2012 and is estimated to have grown at a similar pace in the second quarter, both broadly in line with the estimated growth of the economy's production potential, thus maintaining the small degree of economic slack that existed at the end of 2011. This was a somewhat softer pace of growth than the Bank had expected, however, largely reflecting slightly weaker consumption and business investment, as well as temporary factors such as disruptions in the energy sector. As a result, economic slack was not absorbed through the first half of 2012 as previously projected, with the level of real GDP in the second quarter 0.4 per cent below the level anticipated in the April Report. These dynamics are reflected in the evolution of the Bank's conventional measure of the output gap, which has been broadly stable in recent quarters at around -0.5 per cent.
 
Taken together, other indicators of pressures on capacity also point to the persistence of a small degree of slack in the Canadian economy. Responses to the Bank's Business Outlook Survey in recent quarters have shown that the proportion of firms that would have difficulty responding to an unexpected increase in demand has stayed close to its historical average, while the proportion of firms reporting labour shortages in the Bank's summer Business Outlook Survey has remained somewhat below its historical average. Despite notable increases in employment in March and April, the unemployment rate has remained close to the levels prevailing around mid-2011, and the proportion of involuntary part-time workers continues to be elevated.
 
On balance, the Bank judges that the economy was operating at roughly half of a per cent below its production capacity in the second quarter of 2012. This is the same degree of slack as estimated in the first quarter, and is slightly greater than had been anticipated in the April Report for the second quarter.
 
The Bank expects the Canadian economy to grow at a pace roughly in line with its production potential in coming quarters, before picking up thereafter. On an average annual basis, real GDP growth is forecast to increase slightly from 2.1 per cent in 2012 to 2.3 per cent in 2013 and 2.5 per cent in 2014. This outlook for growth is weaker over the near term than in the April Report.
 
The Bank continues to anticipate that consumption and business fixed investment will be the primary drivers of growth in real GDP over the projection horizon, supported by accommodative domestic financial conditions. Following surprising recent strength, housing investment is expected to slow, contributing to a more balanced composition of economic growth than has been seen in recent quarters. Overall, the outlook for domestic demand is weaker than in the April Report, although the revisions are relatively small, since Canadian business sentiment and household confidence have held up relatively well despite rising global uncertainty. The Bank continues to expect little contribution to economic growth from net exports over the forecast horizon, with roughly offsetting downward revisions to exports and imports in this projection.
 
While growth in household spending has been moderate in recent quarters, it has been disproportionately supported by housing investment, which is around historical highs and showing signs of overbuilding. The growth of consumption has slowed, together with the growth of disposable income, but housing investment has strengthened further, with both the construction of new multiple-family dwellings and renovation activity expanding robustly. In this context, the household debt-to-income  ratio has continued to rise, reaching a record high in the first quarter of 2012.
 
The Bank anticipates that growth in household expenditures will rely less on housing investment over the projection horizon. Growth in consumption is expected to rebound slightly from its modest pace through the first half of 2012, growing at a rate just below that of disposable income through 2014, resulting in a slight increase in the personal savings rate. In contrast, housing investment is projected to slow, with its share of the overall economy moderating somewhat from the current unusually elevated level. In this regard, the additional prudent and timely measures recently announced by federal authorities are expected to contribute to a more sustainable evolution of housing market activity in Canada.
 
The outlook for growth in household expenditures is slightly weaker in this projection than in the April Report, owing in part to the impact of the more subdued global economic and financial environment on Canadian incomes and wealth. Despite the lower forecast for household spending, however, the Bank continues to expect further increases in the household debt-to-income ratio in coming quarters.
 
The Bank continues to forecast solid growth in business fixed investment over the projection horizon. This reflects the strong financial positions of Canadian firms, favourable credit conditions and the strong Canadian dollar, as well as the impetus to improve productivity amid heightened pressures to become more competitive. This forecast is consistent with the positive responses to the Bank's summer Business Outlook Survey. Relative to the April Report, the projected profile for business investment is less robust, partly reflecting recent sharp declines in commodity prices and the more subdued global economic outlook. Nonetheless, with the level of commodity prices expected to stay elevated, the outlook for major investments in the resource sector remains strong.
 
Government spending is projected to subtract from real GDP growth in 2012. This drag on economic growth is larger than in the April Report, as significant further downward revisions to national accounts estimates of government expenditures in recent quarters suggest a more rapid unwinding of the fiscal stimulus measures enacted during the recession than previously estimated. Modest contributions to growth are expected in 2013 and 2014, although these contributions are projected to be considerably weaker than has been typical historically, in line with the plans of federal and provincial governments to consolidate spending.
 
The recovery in net exports is expected to remain weak. Growth in Canada's exports is projected to remain moderate despite steady growth in foreign activity, owing to ongoing competitiveness challenges, including the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar. As a result, the level of Canada's exports is not forecast to regain its pre-recession peak until the beginning of 2014. Growth in imports is expected to be more moderate than previously anticipated, largely as a result of the weaker near-term outlook for consumption and business investment in Canada. Overall, as in the April Report, the projected contribution from net exports to real GDP growth is marginal.
 
Given the above projection for real GDP, the Canadian economy is expected to reach full capacity in the second half of 2013, thus operating with a small amount of slack for somewhat longer than previously anticipated.
 
Inflation expectations remain well anchored. The July Consensus Economics forecasts for total CPI inflation in 2012 and 2013 were 1.9 per cent and 2.0 per cent, respectively. As reported in the Bank's summer Business Outlook Survey, almost all firms surveyed expect average inflation over the next two years to remain within the 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range. Market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations also continue to be consistent with the 2 per cent inflation-control target.
 
Core CPI inflation averaged 2.0 per cent in April and May, down slightly from 2.1 per cent in both the fourth quarter of 2011 and the first quarter of this year. Alternative measures of core inflation have also been clustered around 2 per cent in recent months. Core inflation is forecast to remain around 2 per cent over the projection horizon, as the economy operates near its production potential and inflation expectations stay well anchored. Despite the recent pickup in the growth of wages on a monthly basis, growth in labour compensation is expected to remain moderate and thus contribute to the projected stability in inflation. Some monthly volatility in core inflation can also be expected in the near term, primarily as a result of the unusually sharp movements in prices for motor vehicles observed a year ago. Over the projection horizon, the indirect effects associated with the restoration of the provincial sales tax in British Columbia are expected to have a minor effect on core inflation.
 
Total CPI inflation averaged 1.6 per cent in April and May, down from an average of 2.4 per cent in the first quarter. This was a larger decline than the Bank had expected, primarily reflecting the impact of the sharper-than-anticipated declines in world oil prices on gasoline prices in Canada. With futures prices suggesting the persistence of lower oil prices than had been anticipated at the time of the April Report, the Bank now expects total CPI inflation to remain noticeably below the 2 per cent target over the coming year before returning to the target around mid-2013.
 
This projection includes a gradual reduction in monetary stimulus over the projection horizon, consistent with achieving the inflation target.
 
The uncertainty surrounding the Bank's inflation projection is illustrated using fan charts. Chart 36 and Chart 37 depict the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the third quarter of 2012 to the end of 2014.
 
The inflation outlook in Canada is subject to significant risks. In particular, the Bank's projection assumes that authorities in Europe are able to contain the ongoing crisis, although this assumption is clearly subject to downside risks.
 
The three main upside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the possibility of higher global inflationary pressures, stronger Canadian exports and stronger momentum in Canadian household spending.
 
Global inflationary pressures could be more persistent than currently projected if potential output in advanced economies is lower than anticipated or if agricultural and other commodity prices are stronger than projected.
 
Growth in Canadian exports could be stronger than expected, and more in line with the anticipated growth in foreign activity, if Canadian exporters improve their competitiveness more rapidly than currently assumed.
 
Residential investment in Canada has surprised on the upside, reaching record-high levels, and could have more momentum than currently projected.
 
The three main downside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the European crisis, weaker global momentum and the possibility that growth in Canadian household spending could be weaker.
 
Failure to contain the crisis in Europe is the most serious risk facing the global and Canadian economies. The effects on Canada through financial, confidence and trade channels would be substantial, given the size and importance of the euro area to the global economy.
 
Demand for Canadian exports could be weaker than expected if authorities in the United States do not smooth the path of fiscal consolidation to avoid the fiscal cliff or if the slowdown in emerging-market economies is greater than expected.
 
Continuing high household debt levels in Canada could lead to a sharper-than-expected deceleration in household spending. Relatedly, if there were a sudden weakening in the Canadian housing sector, it could have sizable spillover effects on other areas of the economy.
 
Overall, the Bank judges that the risks to the inflation outlook in Canada are roughly balanced over the projection period.