The Bank expects global economic growth to strengthen gradually after a weaker-than-expected start to 2016. Incoming data are consistent with a continuation of modest global growth, as projected in the January Monetary Policy Report. This flow of data, as well as actions taken by central banks, has supported an improvement in financial conditions by alleviating markets' immediate concerns about the possibility of a pronounced slowdown. The European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan have provided additional stimulus, while the US Federal Reserve has signalled a slower pace of monetary tightening.
 
The anticipated firming in global growth, from approximately 3 per cent in 2016 to around 3 1/2 per cent in 2017-18, should be supported by accommodative monetary policy, a slowing rate of contraction in certain emerging-market economies and reforms to promote economic growth in various countries. The profile of growth is modestly lower than projected in January, however, reflecting the weaker start to 2016 in some regions, as well as a small downward revision to the estimated path of global potential gross domestic product. Oil prices have been volatile but remain low and continue to affect regions differently. The adjustment process for commodity exporters is being supported by past exchange rate depreciations, which are helping boost their net exports.
 
Economic activity in the United States expanded at a modest pace at the end of 2015 and the beginning of 2016. While US private domestic demand in the latter part of 2015 proved more resilient than anticipated in the January Report, particularly consumption and residential investment, growth is now expected to remain modest in the first quarter of 2016. The softer start to the year reflects weaker consumer spending in January, additional drag from the oil and gas sector on investment and the lagged effect of a stronger US dollar on exports.
 
Total GDP growth is projected to firm over 2016, bolstered by underlying strength in labour markets and consumer confidence, low oil prices and still-accommodative monetary policy. The US labour market averaged monthly job gains of over 200,000 during the first quarter of 2016, a strong pace that has been maintained since March 2014. There are signs that the strength in employment growth is now helping draw workers back into the labour market: since September 2015, the participation rate has risen steadily, reversing some of the decline seen since the 2007-09 global financial and economic crisis.
 
Solid fundamentals are expected to support growth of around 2 per cent over the projection horizon. This is a more moderate pace than projected in the January Report, reflecting the weaker start to 2016 and revised assessments of housing and productivity trends. Residential investment is expected to expand at a robust pace of 9 per cent per year through 2018, although it has been revised down in light of a reassessment of underlying housing market fundamentals. This revision reflects a reassessment of the implications of the shift in US housing construction toward multiple-unit housing, which is less investment-intensive, and constrained access to mortgage credit for some borrowers. The persistent weakness in trend productivity growth also suggests a pace of GDP growth over the forecast horizon that is somewhat slower than previously anticipated.
 
Inflation has picked up since the fourth quarter of 2015 and is expected to reach 2 per cent by 2018 as labour market slack is gradually absorbed.
 
Modest economic recoveries in the euro area and Japan are being underpinned by expansionary monetary policy, low oil prices and past exchange rate depreciations. A number of factors continue to dampen growth and inflation. In the euro area, growth is being restrained by ongoing deleveraging, weak investor confidence and tight lending conditions. These factors are being partly offset by an increase in fiscal spending to support the large inflow of refugees. Meanwhile, in Japan, lacklustre wage growth is restraining consumption.
 
China continues to pursue a more sustainable growth path for its economy. The economy is being rebalanced away from investment toward consumption and away from heavy industry toward the service sector, which now accounts for just over 50 per cent of China's GDP. While the pace of growth is expected to ease gradually, there are challenges inherent in the transition; for example, slower growth raises the possibility that highly leveraged firms could be a source of financial stress.
 
China's GDP growth is expected to slow from 6.9 per cent in 2015 to 6.3 per cent in 2018 - a decline that is somewhat more gradual than anticipated in the January Report. Recent fiscal announcements and credit data suggest that the Chinese government is taking measures to support domestic demand growth. Fiscal stimulus is expected to be focused on additional infrastructure spending and tax relief for businesses. While this additional policy support should boost growth in the short term, financial vulnerabilities will also increase further if the government's targeted increases in broader credit growth are met.
 
In other oil-importing EMEs, growth is expected to strengthen as the sharp contractions in economic activity in some economies moderate, the net benefits of lower oil prices accumulate and progress is made on structural reforms, particularly the removal of regulatory obstacles to growth. Conditions in contracting economies such as Brazil have not improved by as much as anticipated, however. Net exports for oil-importing EMEs are also expected to be softer, a result of weaker external demand. The near-term outlook for oil-importing EMEs is therefore somewhat weaker relative to the January Report.
 
Growth is expected to pick up in the rest of the world over 2017-18 as the Russian economy stabilizes and other oil-exporting economies adjust to lower oil prices. While the effects of this adjustment are expected to dissipate, the outlook for the rest of the world is weaker relative to the January Report, reflecting further reductions in investment in the oil sector and additional fiscal cuts announced by some oil exporters.
 
Although the recent period has been challenging for many EMEs, they have, on the whole, taken measures over the past two decades to improve their ability to withstand economic and financial stresses. Nonetheless, some pockets of vulnerabilities have intensified, particularly in countries where the decline in commodity prices has exacerbated geopolitical, political and fiscal concerns and in countries with rising US-dollar denominated corporate debt. While many EMEs are planning further structural reforms to increase their resilience to external shocks and to support growth over the coming years, progress is likely to be uneven.
 
The estimated growth potential of the global economy has been revised down to about 3 1/4 per cent, on average, over the projection horizon. The revision primarily reflects weaker-than-expected investment in EMEs, particularly those that export oil. The Bank has also lowered its assessment of the growth rate of potential output for the US economy to about 1 3/4 per cent, reflecting productivity growth that has remained lower than anticipated. While US productivity growth is expected to improve gradually, the ongoing weakness suggests a softer trend than previously estimated. The persistent sluggishness in global trade and investment in recent years may have also weighed on global productivity growth.
 
Prices of energy and non-energy commodities remain well below historical averages. Uncertainty about the nature and speed of supply and demand adjustments is contributing to recent volatility in oil prices. Factors influencing these price movements include reductions in US shale oil production, temporary supply disruptions in Iraq and Nigeria and improved market sentiment with respect to global growth (particularly for China).
 
By convention, the Bank assumes that oil prices will remain near their recent levels. The per-barrel prices for Brent, West Texas Intermediate and Western Canada Select in US dollars have recently averaged $40, $38 and $25, respectively, two to three dollars higher than the January assumption.
 
The near-term outlook for oil prices is subject to both upside and downside risks. Downside risks from elevated inventories remain, particularly in the US Midwest. In addition, if producers are able to find further cost savings or if US oil firms take advantage of the recent firming in prices to hedge future production, the rebalancing of the market may be more protracted than expected. There are equally important upside risks to prices. Reduced access to financing for highly indebted US shale oil producers could result in a faster-than-anticipated decline in supply. Some members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and non-OPEC producers are negotiating an output freeze, raising the likelihood of a broader agreement to curtail production. Political instability in some oil exporters could also lead to supply disruptions.
 
Over the medium term, the risks to oil prices are tilted to the upside, but the price level required to balance the market remains highly uncertain. The substantial reduction in US shale investment since 2014 is expected to lead to further declines in US oil production. As supply from non-OPEC countries decreases and demand growth remains steady, the current supply overhang in the global oil market is expected to diminish. The potential amount of a price increase is limited, however, because ongoing cost-cutting initiatives and technological advances are helping to lower production costs, in particular, for unconventional oil production, such as shale oil.
 
Non-energy commodity prices are modestly higher than January levels, reflecting increases across a range of subcomponents. The expectation of additional infrastructure spending in China has alleviated some concerns over future demand for base metals, providing support for their prices. Many metals are expected to remain in excess supply over the coming years, however, as recently completed mines continue to ramp up production globally. In contrast, lumber prices are expected to rise through 2018 since strong housing demand in the United States - albeit less robust than anticipated in January - coincides with more modest growth in Canadian lumber supply than observed over 2015. Overall, prices for agricultural products are expected to remain near current levels. In light of these forces, the Bank's non-energy commodity price index is projected to stay near its recent level over the projection horizon.
 
Financial conditions were deteriorating at the start of 2016 on heightened market concerns about the durability of the global recovery. However, data released since January as well as other factors have alleviated concerns about a sharp slowdown in global growth. Most equity index prices have increased, there have been portfolio inflows in many EMEs and credit spreads have narrowed. Actions taken by central banks have also been important in improving financial conditions. Additional easing by the Bank of Japan and the ECB has helped to lower sovereign yields further, while the euro area has also seen a decrease in corporate yields coinciding with the expansion of its quantitative easing program to include corporate debt. Markets have also interpreted statements by the US Federal Reserve as signalling a shift to a more moderate pace of monetary tightening, which has helped to maintain downward pressure on US Treasury yields, providing further support to asset prices.
 
Although volatility in financial markets has declined since January, market uncertainty over the strength of the global recovery remains. Correlations among global asset price movements, together with diminished liquidity in some markets, may make asset prices and capital flows susceptible to sharp movements should new economic data be disappointing. EMEs with large stocks of debt denominated in foreign currencies remain particularly vulnerable to sudden shifts in market sentiment.
 
While the Bank's foreign activity measure, an indicator of demand for Canadian exports, is expected to grow strongly over the forecast horizon, it has been revised down. This change reflects the revised outlook for US residential investment and investment in the US oil and gas sector, which are key sources of demand for Canadian exports.
 
The Canadian dollar has appreciated against the US dollar in response to shifting market expectations for monetary policy paths in both countries as well as increases in commodity prices. By convention, the Canadian dollar is assumed to be close to its recent average of 76 cents over the projection horizon, compared with the 72 cents assumed in January.
 
Since the beginning of 2016, total CPI inflation has remained below 2 per cent, on average. The downward pressure from declines in consumer energy prices and persistent excess capacity has been only partially offset by the temporary boost from the pass-through of the Canadian dollar's past depreciation to the prices of consumer goods. These effects are expected to gradually diminish. As a result, total CPI inflation is projected to remain below 2 per cent through 2016 and to be close to 2 per cent thereafter. Core inflation is expected to be around 2 per cent throughout the projection horizon as the disinflationary effects of slack in the economy are counter balanced by the positive effects of exchange rate pass-through.
 
The Canadian economy continues to undergo complex adjustments to the declines in global commodity prices and in Canada's terms of trade. Contraction of business investment in the energy sector has been an important drag on economic activity. Activity in areas outside the most affected industries has continued to expand, and employment and household expenditures have held up at the national level.
 
The reorientation toward the non-resource sectors is being supported by the ongoing expansion in the United States, the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar and accommodative monetary and financial conditions. The complex adjustment will have important consequences for the growth of potential output for the next several years. The Bank's estimate for potential output growth is now materially lower than previously estimated.
 
Real GDP is estimated to have increased by 2.8 per cent in the first quarter of 2016 but is expected to moderate in the second quarter. This growth dynamic primarily reflects volatility in trade flows and uneven timing of household expenditures over the first half of the year. Subsequently, growth is expected to strengthen as the drag from the resource sector wanes and the expansion of economic activity in the non-resource sector asserts itself as the dominant trend. Real GDP is expected to grow by 1.7 per cent in 2016, 2.3 per cent in 2017 and 2.0 per cent in 2018.
 
The projection for economic activity through 2016 and 2017 has been revised up. Slower foreign demand growth, the higher Canadian dollar and a downward revision to business investment all have negative impacts on the outlook but are more than offset by the positive effects of the fiscal measures announced in the federal budget in March. The net effects of the upward revision to real GDP and the downward revision to potential output growth is that, in the Bank's base-case projection, the output gap is likely to close sometime in the second half of 2017, somewhat earlier than anticipated in January.
 
GDP growth slowed to a very modest pace in the fourth quarter of 2015. Investment in oil and gas related industries contracted further, while the rest of the economy continued to expand, supported by the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar and accommodative monetary and financial conditions. As a result of the ongoing weakness in commodity prices, business investment continued to decline. Growth was also restrained by further significant adjustments in inventory investment as firms drew down stocks from elevated levels and by a partial reversal of the surge in exports in the previous quarter. In contrast, household expenditures grew moderately, underpinned by gains in personal disposable income and increased household borrowing.
 
Real GDP is estimated to have grown by 2.8 per cent in the first quarter, reflecting strength in monthly data on GDP, merchandise trade, housing and retail sales at the start of the year. However, activity in household expenditures and exports have recently slowed, suggesting that real GDP growth should moderate to about 1.0 per cent in the second quarter. Overall, the Bank now estimates that real GDP growth will pick up in the first half of 2016 to average roughly 2 per cent, somewhat stronger than anticipated in January.
 
Estimates from the Bank's two measures of economic slack (the structural and statistical approaches) indicate a widening of the output gap since the onset of the terms-of-trade shock and currently point to material excess capacity in the Canadian economy. Similarly, the results of the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey suggest that capacity pressures remain subdued, particularly in the Prairies, where they continue to ease.
 
Measures of labour market health indicate continued slack: Canada's unemployment rate was 7.1 per cent in March; and the prevalence of involuntary part-time employment, long-term unemployment and the absence of wage pressures all suggest that labour is being underutilized.
 
Although national employment continues to increase, adjustment in the labour market is ongoing. British Columbia and Ontario have shown strong net job growth. In the service sector, strong employment growth has supported solid growth in total labour input. In goods-producing industries, including in the higher-paying mining, oil and gas sector, employment has been relatively weak.
 
Overall, the Bank judges that the amount of excess capacity in the economy remains material in the first quarter of 2016, at between 1/2 and 1 1/2 per cent.
 
Total inflation has evolved largely as anticipated and is expected to remain below 2.0 per cent in the coming quarters, reflecting the sharp drop in consumer energy prices. Total CPI inflation rose to 2.0 per cent in January, because of temporary base-year effects associated with particularly low gasoline prices in January 2015, and then fell back to 1.4 per cent in February. Looking through this monthly volatility, slack in the Canadian economy has continued to be a source of downward pressure on total inflation. Meanwhile, exchange rate pass-through from the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar has been exerting temporary upward pressure, which the Bank estimates added 0.8 to 1.0 percentage points to total CPI inflation in the first quarter of 2016. The importance of pass-through is illustrated by comparing inflation rates in Canada for selected goods with high import content to the rates for similar goods in the United States.
 
Currently, most measures of core inflation remain close to 2 per cent. Given excess supply in the economy, these measures would be lower without the impact of exchange rate pass-through.
 
The outlook for the Canadian economy is significantly affected by the ongoing adjustment to the decline in commodity prices. In the resource sector, investment is being scaled back and significant layoffs are ongoing. However, the effects of the negative factors weighing on the resource sector will become less intense, and the drag on overall GDP growth is expected to wane over 2016. Meanwhile, activity in the rest of the economy is expanding and is expected to be the main source of growth over the next few years. In particular, non-commodity exports are projected to trend upward, spurring investment and employment. The timing and magnitude of these respective adjustments in productive capacity in the two sectors will determine potential output growth and economic activity over the medium term.
 
Potential output growth is expected to be weaker while the Canadian economy adjusts to lower commodity prices. Trend labour productivity and trend labour input influence the outlook for potential output. The current weakness in trend labour productivity growth reflects the declines in investment. As the economy restructures and investment in the non-resource sector picks up, trend labour productivity growth should accelerate. Trend labour input growth, meanwhile, is expected to continue to decline in response to slower population growth and continued population aging.
 
Relative to the previous annual assessment conducted in April 2015, projections for potential output growth have been revised down, mainly reflecting slower growth in trend labour productivity as a result of weaker investment. Further details on the Bank's reassessment of potential output are provided in the Appendix.
 
There is much uncertainty about the magnitude and timing of the effects of the commodity price shock on potential output. In addition to the direct impact of weaker investment, potential output is affected by the reallocation of investment and employment. As the non-resource sector gains strength and excess capacity is absorbed, investment, including through new firm creation, is expected. This expanded capacity and stronger activity could further reduce long-term unemployment and underemployment in the labour market. The procyclical effects of firm and employment creation could provide a small boost to potential output growth. However, the size and timing of these effects are highly uncertain. Because of the uncertainty associated with these and other factors, the Bank's estimate for potential output growth is presented as a range, with the midpoint of the range averaging about 1.5 per cent over the projection horizon.
 
Financial conditions for households and businesses in Canada remain highly stimulative. While yields on 5-year Government of Canada bonds, as well as the funding costs of Canadian banks, are roughly unchanged since the beginning of the year, long-term mortgage rates have edged down to historical lows. In this context, growth in household mortgage credit has remained robust in recent months.
 
Most firms surveyed in the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey continue to characterize credit as easy or relatively easy to obtain. Indeed, following some slowing in 2015, the growth of business credit appears to have stabilized somewhat above its historical average (5.4 per cent) in recent months. Nevertheless, firms directly or indirectly exposed to the energy sector reported a tightening in credit conditions. Similarly, the further tightening in business-lending conditions reported by the Bank's Senior Loan Officer Survey was concentrated in the oil and gas sector.
 
The prices for oil, natural gas and other commodities remain low, and firms in the oil and gas sector have announced further cuts in their capital spending plans. Based on these announcements, the Bank estimates that the level of investment in that sector in 2016 is likely to decline sharply for a second year in a row, to about 60 per cent below its 2014 level.
 
The sharp decline in investment in the oil and gas sector in 2015 and 2016 is expected to restrain future production. Growth in energy exports is therefore expected to moderate in the coming years but to remain positive as oil sands projects currently under construction are completed.
 
Overall growth in commodity exports is expected to remain modest over the projection horizon. Low prices and competitiveness challenges continue to dampen investment spending in mining. However, some non-energy commodity firms face more-favourable conditions. For example, lumber exporters should continue to benefit from an improving US housing market, and agricultural production and exports are projected to pick up as global food demand rises.
 
The reorientation of the Canadian economy toward the non-resource sector is being facilitated by the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar and accommodative financial conditions. There are signs that the sequence of increasing foreign demand, strengthening exports and improving business confidence is progressing.
 
Looking through monthly volatility, non-commodity exports have recently strengthened and are expected to continue to grow at a solid pace, on average, with growth of US private domestic demand. Moreover, the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar has improved the price competitiveness of Canadian products. While the timing and magnitude of the benefits of the depreciation differ across industries, several categories of goods exports that are more sensitive to the exchange rate are showing positive momentum. Examples include building and packaging materials, furniture and fixtures, paper and published products, and large motor vehicles (e.g., heavy trucks and buses). Nevertheless, since the Bank expects that some of the recent strength of non-commodity exports relative to foreign demand is temporary, export growth is projected to be stronger in 2016 than in 2017. While non-commodity exports are expected to increase solidly, the profile is somewhat lower relative to January's projection, given the downward revision to external demand and the higher assumed level for the Canadian dollar.
 
Findings from the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey support the outlook for total exports. More than half of the firms surveyed reported that US demand is providing a boost to their sales outlook. This includes firms already exporting to the United States, those in the process of refocusing their efforts to regain market share abroad and those developing new sales opportunities.
 
As non-commodity exports strengthen, the absorption of existing capacity in the sector is expected to encourage investment. Consequently, business investment is projected to expand starting in the second half of this year as capital expenditures in the non-resource sector pick up, more than offsetting the drag from lower investment in the resource sector. Since a large share of investment goods are foreign-sourced, this strengthening of investment is expected to lead to an increase in imports.
 
Sectoral analysis also suggests that conditions for investment in the non-resource sector have generally improved since 2014. Rates of manufacturing capacity utilization for many industries in export categories that are more sensitive to the exchange rate have risen close to their historical highs. As demand - both foreign and domestic - increases, these industries will need to invest in factories and machinery and equipment to expand production. In addition, for many exporters, the exchange rate depreciation has boosted margins and cash flow denominated in Canadian dollars, providing funding for them to expand their investment spending. There are increasingly tangible signs that businesses exposed to foreign markets, including those in service industries such as tourism and information technology, intend to boost investment to take advantage of solid foreign demand. Meanwhile, although the population of firms in the mining, oil and gas industries has declined by 7.1 per cent since oil prices peaked in the middle of 2014, the number of firms in the rest of the economy has increased by 1.5 per cent.
 
Overall, investment outside the resource sector is expected to strengthen. The timing of this pickup remains uncertain as firms remain cautious: results of the spring Business Outlook Survey suggest that some firms continue to wait for signs of a sustained pickup in demand before increasing investment.
 
The fiscal measures included in the March 2016 federal budget amount to roughly $25 billion of additional spending over the next two years. Specifically, the federal government will spend about $11 billion over this period on infrastructure investments and $12 billion on measures for households, including the new Canada Child Benefit. Several other spending measures, such as environmental projects, programs to improve the socioeconomic conditions of indigenous peoples, and the construction and renovation of affordable housing, are also notable for their likely impact on GDP.
 
The impact of fiscal policy on economic activity depends on its multiplier effect - how much the level of output increases for every additional dollar of government stimulus. Multipliers vary according to the type of fiscal measure, which can be broadly divided into infrastructure investment, other government spending, and tax and transfer measures. Government infrastructure investment tends to have a larger multiplier effect than other measures, since it often generates broader spillovers to the economy beyond the direct spending effects.  The near-term impact on the economy of transfers and taxes, in contrast, may be smaller if households choose to save the additional income or use it to purchase goods and services from abroad.
 
The effects of the recently announced fiscal measures will begin to be felt in 2016 and will build through 2017. Analysis suggests that incorporating these new measures, as well as the recent measures introduced at the provincial level, into the projection results in a contribution to GDP growth of government spending of 0.5 percentage points in 2016 and 0.6 percentage points in 2017.
 
Household expenditures are projected to grow at a moderate pace over the projection period, restrained by the ongoing effect of the decline in Canada's terms of trade. While the terms of trade improved substantially in the 10-year period before oil prices began to decrease in the middle of 2014, about half of those gains have now been lost.  This represents a drop of more than $60 billion in national income. The resulting adverse effect on wealth and income is being partially offset by strengthening employment in the non-resource sector and the recently announced federal fiscal measures (notably, the new Canada Child Benefit). In recent data, the adjustment to the decline in commodity prices is evident in a comparison of employment, retail sales and housing activity across regions, with households in the oil-producing provinces cutting expenditures sharply.
 
In the housing market, new construction and activity in the resale market are strong in British Columbia and Ontario, while there are declines in housing activity in the oil-producing provinces and relative stability in Quebec and the Maritime provinces. The strength in British Columbia and Ontario appears, in part, to reflect local demand stimulated by employment growth. The shift in interprovincial migration in response to the oil price shock is reinforcing the regional divergence in housing market activity as workers leave the oil-producing provinces for Ontario and British Columbia.
 
The strength of housing demand in Ontario and British Columbia is contributing strongly to growth in residential mortgage credit. As a result, the overall ratio of household debt to disposable income has edged higher.
 
On an average annual basis, real GDP is expected to grow by 1.7 per cent in 2016, 2.3 per cent in 2017 and 2.0 per cent in 2018. This projection has been revised up slightly from January, reflecting stronger government expenditures associated with the recently announced fiscal measures that more than offset the drag associated with weaker foreign demand and a stronger dollar, a more severe contraction of business investment in the oil and gas sector, and weaker trend productivity growth. In view of these revisions and the downward revision to the Bank's assessment of potential output growth, the Bank now projects that the output gap will close sometime in the second half of 2017, somewhat earlier than anticipated in January.
 
Given the uncertainty around the estimates of the output gap, the projection for the timing of the economy's return to full potential is highly imprecise. On its own, uncertainty associated with the estimate of the output gap at the start of the projection implies considerable uncertainty about the timing of the return of economic activity to full potential. Other factors also contribute to uncertainty regarding the trajectory of the output gap.
 
Total CPI inflation is expected to remain below 2 per cent through 2016 as disinflationary pressures associated with weak consumer energy prices and excess capacity in the Canadian economy more than offset the inflationary effects of exchange rate pass-through. The Bank estimates that the upward pressure on total CPI inflation from exchange rate pass-through peaked in the fourth quarter of 2015 (adding about 0.9 to 1.1 percentage points to total inflation) and will gradually fade through 2016. Total CPI inflation is expected to remain at 2 per cent on a sustained basis after the economy stabilizes at full capacity, although the timing is highly uncertain given the ongoing complex economic adjustments. Core inflation is expected to remain near 2 per cent throughout the projection period as the upward pressure from exchange rate pass-through roughly offsets downward pressure from excess supply.
 
The forecast for total CPI inflation is revised up marginally from January, reflecting revisions to both the projection of the output gap and the impact on inflation of temporary factors. These factors include a revised view on the evolution of gasoline margins and the recent announcement of a cap-and-trade plan for carbon emissions in Ontario.  The impact of these developments on inflation will be partly offset by a downward revision to exchange rate pass-through since the assumed level of the Canadian dollar is now higher. Overall, inflation is expected to return sustainably to 2 per cent sometime in the second half of 2017, somewhat earlier than anticipated in January.
 
Medium-term inflation expectations have continued to be well anchored at 2 per cent. The March Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation was 1.6 per cent for 2016, likely reflecting weak oil prices at the time of the survey, and 2.0 per cent for 2017. Results from the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey indicate that a large majority of firms continue to expect CPI inflation to remain within the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range over the next two years.
 
Based on the past dispersion of private sector forecasts, a reasonable range around the base-case projection for total CPI inflation is ±0.3 percentage points. This range is intended to convey a sense of forecast uncertainty. A fan chart, which is derived using statistical analysis of the Bank's forecast errors, provides a complementary perspective.
 
The outlook for inflation is subject to several risks emanating from both the external environment and the domestic economy. The Bank judges that the risks to the projected path for inflation are roughly balanced.
 
While the outlook for actual and potential GDP growth in the United States has been revised downward, it is possible that this reflects an overly cautious interpretation of labour force and productivity trends. Productivity in the United States may rise more than expected if the persistent weakness in US growth contains a larger-than-estimated cyclical element. In particular, the ongoing economic recovery could lead to an acceleration in firm creation, greater adoption of new technologies and more innovation. As well, the ongoing strength in the US labour market and the creation of new businesses may draw discouraged workers back into the labour force. Any of these developments would raise the potential growth rate of the US economy, boosting actual GDP growth. Stronger US economic growth could have positive spillovers to Canada from increased demand for Canadian exports and improved global confidence.
 
Canadian exports have recently shown renewed momentum, outpacing foreign demand. The Bank's projection for exports nevertheless remains conservative and assumes that some of the recent strength is transitory, given the uncertain timing of the impact of past exchange rate depreciation. However, the recent strength in exports could indicate that the effect of the dollar's depreciation is more positive. Firms may have begun to use their better pricing position to increase their share of foreign markets. In such a scenario, the recent momentum in exports may prove more durable than assumed in the Bank's base-case projection, especially as US and global demand strengthen. Exports could continue to outpace foreign demand for some time as firms take advantage of the new environment.
 
Canadian household spending has underpinned economic activity and is expected to continue to do so over the projection horizon. In the wake of the terms-of-trade shock, consumer confidence declined significantly, primarily reflecting the deterioration of sentiment in the energy-producing regions. As the effect of the shock on incomes builds, the weakness in confidence may diffuse more broadly. At the same time, households have become more indebted, which may cause them to be more prudent and save more than expected, based on historical experience.
 
Considerable uncertainty remains about whether energy producers and related firms will be able to maintain their activity levels at current low prices. While there are upside risks to energy prices over the medium term, the longer these low prices persist, the more likely that firms will be forced to restrict production, employment and investment spending more than currently anticipated, with associated negative consequences for energy-producing regions and the broader economy.
 
Growth could be slower than expected in some EMEs, particularly commodity exporters, because some of those already in recession could face renewed stresses and some additional countries could come under pressure. Further tightening of US monetary policy could trigger large capital outflows, tighter credit conditions and debt risks in EMEs that have issued significant amounts of corporate debt denominated in US dollars. Important structural reforms, which are necessary to expand potential output growth, could also be delayed. In addition, China's financial system could come under stress from the anticipated buildup of financial imbalances as authorities put greater emphasis on short-term growth, which could generate broader spillovers to economic activity. Slower growth in China or other EMEs could affect Canada through several channels, including lower commodity prices, weaker export sales, increased uncertainty and financial market volatility.