In its November Monetary Policy Report, the Bank's projection was for continued solid global economic expansion but with a noticeable slowing in 2001, particularly in the United States.
 
Since then, there has been accumulating evidence that global economic growth has begun to slow somewhat more and sooner than anticipated. As a result, projections for growth in Europe and Japan have been revised downwards slightly for 2001. For the United States, we now project growth at a rate of 2.0 to 2.5 per cent, one full percentage point below the range expected in the November Report. This downward revision to the growth projection for 2001 primarily reflects a weaker first half, followed by a relatively strong rebound in the second half of the year.
 
Despite a slowing world economy and a deceleration in export growth, the pace of economic expansion in Canada remained solid in the second half of 2000, bolstered by strong domestic demand. Indeed, growth in this period slightly exceeded the Bank's expectations. Employment also grew rapidly, indicating significant momentum in the economy. In spite of this starting position going into 2001, the Bank's projection for this year has been revised down to about 3 per cent - the bottom end of the 3 to 4 per cent range projected last November - because of spillover effects from a weaker US economy late in 2000 and in the first half of this year.
 
At 1.9 per cent, core inflation in December was marginally higher than anticipated. Although some month-to-month volatility may result in core inflation rising temporarily above 2 per cent early this year, the Bank's baseline projection is for core inflation to steady out at about 2 per cent through this year. With crude oil prices having declined to around $30 per barrel, it now seems likely that total CPI inflation, currently just above 3 per cent, will come down to around 2 per cent in the second half of 2001.
 
These developments over the past three months have altered the risks and uncertainties for Canada's economic outlook. The slowdown now evident in the US economy raises the issue of how marked that slowdown will be and how quickly the economy will rebound. For Canada, an important question is the extent to which the current strength in domestic demand will continue to offset weaker US demand for our exports. The recent decline in world oil prices has also somewhat reduced the risk that inflation expectations could heighten in response to rising headline rates of inflation. At the same time, there continues to be some uncertainty regarding the future growth of the economy's productive capacity. Recent productivity growth suggests that the economy's production capacity could be rising at a higher rate than the 3 per cent assumed by the Bank. Nevertheless, current indicators point to an economy operating at close to full capacity.
 
Growth in the emerging-market economies has been somewhat faster than expected. Nevertheless, the near-term outlook is still subject to a number of risks. Market sentiment towards emerging markets in Asia has deteriorated over the past few months. This deterioration stems largely from concerns about a possible downturn in global demand for electronic products, the impact of high world oil prices, political instability, and, in some cases, the slow pace of restructuring in corporate and financial sectors. In addition, both Turkey and Argentina - two large international borrowers - have had to negotiate new IMF programs.
 
Some of these pressures on emerging-market countries will, however, be alleviated by lower interest rates in the United States and, for countries whose currencies are pegged to the US dollar, by its recent depreciation.
 
In the euro area, the pace of expansion slowed in the second half of 2000, partly owing to past increases in official rates by the European Central Bank. In addition, surveys suggest a recent decline in both business and household confidence. Indeed, household spending weakened significantly in the third quarter. As a result, growth in the euro area in 2001 is now expected to be slightly below the 3 per cent projected in the November Report.
 
The Japanese economy remains fragile. Real GDP rose only marginally in the second and third quarters of 2000, despite strong business investment. Household spending has remained flat, reflecting weak income growth and concerns about employment prospects. Moreover, the lagged effect of the appreciation of the yen has contributed to a marked slowing in export growth. The Japanese economy is expected to grow at about 1.0 per cent in 2001 - lower than the 1.5 per cent projected in the November Report.
 
Recent developments indicate that the slowdown of the US economy has been more abrupt and more pronounced than anticipated. Because that economy has been operating in excess demand, some slowdown is warranted to reduce inflationary pressures.
 
US real GDP rose by only 2.2 per cent in the third quarter of 2000, down sharply from previous quarters. Employment growth has also slowed significantly in recent months, and average hours worked have fallen markedly.
 
Consumer spending (particularly for motor vehicles) and residential construction have eased in response to past increases in interest rates, declines in personal wealth associated with weakening stock prices, and higher energy prices.
 
At the same time, tighter credit conditions and lending standards have combined with reduced profit margins to restrain business investment.
 
The Bank now expects US real GDP to expand by 2.0 to 2.5 per cent, on average, in 2001. Growth is expected to be particularly weak in the first half of the year, before rebounding relatively strongly in the third and fourth quarters.
 
Despite the slowdown in the US economy to a rate below that of potential growth, core inflation has not yet shown signs of easing. The US economy continues to operate at a high level, as evidenced by the low unemployment rate.
 
Nonetheless, at its December meeting, in light of the slowing in the pace of activity, the Federal Open Market Committee shifted its forward-looking focus from heightened inflation pressures to economic weakness. And in early January, the Committee made an intermeeting decision to lower its target federal funds rate by 50 basis points.
 
As of 23 January, financial markets were expecting that the US Federal Reserve would reduce its federal funds target by an additional 50 basis points at its end-January meeting and a further 50 basis points by mid-year.
 
Prices for crude oil and natural gas have been volatile since the end of October, driven by low inventories of petroleum products such as heating oil, by cold winter weather, and by short-term concerns over tensions in the Middle East. On balance, however, oil prices have eased over the period, as the effects of increases in world supply have become more apparent. Natural gas prices, while currently very high because of tight supplies and winter weather conditions, are also expected to ease somewhat this year.
 
Although cattle and grains prices have recovered, the US-dollar price of non-energy commodities has been below the Bank's previous expectations.
 
Real GDP rose at an annual rate of 4.8 per cent in the third quarter of 2000, above the upper end of the range projected in the November Report. Once again, business investment in machinery and equipment increased considerably, reflecting further gains in profits. Household spending also grew quite strongly. Export volumes edged down, however, mainly owing to a marked slowing in the growth of US aggregate demand and to supply problems in the energy and automotive sectors. This abrupt weakening in the growth of external demand for Canadian goods contributed to a substantial rise in inventories in the manufacturing sector.
 
For the last quarter of 2000, current information suggests that economic growth was in a range of 3 to 3.5 per cent. A modest recovery in exports seems to have occurred, as the above-mentioned supply problems were resolved. Residential construction appears to have risen considerably, while overall consumer expenditures were supported by a further rise in employment. Spending on motor vehicles fell back, however, as dealer incentives became less attractive. Early information also suggests that the pace of business investment eased substantially.
 
With higher-than-expected growth in the third quarter and small upward revisions to real GDP in the first half of the year, economic activity in 2000 is expected to have grown by 5 per cent on an annual average basis. For 2001, the Bank is now projecting economic growth of about 3 per cent - the bottom of the 3 to 4 per cent range projected last November and about equal to the Bank's projected rate of potential growth for the economy. This downward revision reflects the implications for Canada of a weaker US economy, especially in the first half of the year.
 
The strength of Canada's economic growth in the third quarter of 2000 and the monitored good performance in the fourth quarter suggest that the Canadian economy is operating at about full capacity, as projected in the November Report.
 
Statistics Canada's measured rate of capacity utilization for the non-farm, goods-producing sector in the third quarter was at about the same level as in the late 1980s. There are continuing reports of skilled labour shortages in areas such as the high-technology and construction sectors. As well, vacancy rates in the residential and commercial real estate sectors are very low.
 
Still, several indicators of pressures on capacity suggest that a small amount of slack remained in the second half of 2000. For example, the level of inventories relative to sales has risen over the past year, and labour market participation rates have also continued to increase.
 
Overall, the full range of current indicators suggests that the economy is operating close to capacity.
 
The 12-month rate of increase in the core CPI was 1.9 per cent in December, up from 1.3 per cent in September and marginally above the expectations of the November Report. The higher-than-anticipated level of core inflation partly reflected efforts by motor vehicle manufacturers and dealers to reduce price discounting. The rise in core inflation in the fourth quarter may also be another indicator that the amount of slack in product markets has largely been absorbed. Other statistical measures of the trend rate of inflation were close to the core rate.
 
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI in December was 3.2 per cent. This continued to be well above core inflation and reflected the substantial increase in energy prices at the consumer level over the past year. While the first-round effects of higher energy costs on the core CPI have been minimal, recent announcements of fare increases in the transportation sector will likely affect consumer prices in 2001.
 
Based on the indicators in Chart 7, as well as on labour compensation per person-hour in the business sector, the underlying rate of increase in the average wage appears to have edged up to just over 3 per cent.
 
The year-over-year increase in output per person-hour in the business sector in the third quarter of 2000 was 2.1 per cent. As a result, the year-over-year rise in unit labour costs in the business sector was held to 1.0 per cent.
 
Core inflation is now expected to steady out at close to 2 per cent through 2001, although month-to-month volatility may cause it to exceed that rate temporarily in the near term. This outlook reflects longer-term inflation expectations remaining near 2 per cent and the economy staying broadly in balance between aggregate demand and supply.
 
If crude oil prices remain at or below US$30 a barrel, the year-to-year increase in the total CPI is expected to decline to about 2 per cent in the second half of 2001.
 
Growth in gross M1 slowed further in the fourth quarter. The three-month growth rate of gross M1 fell to 7 per cent in December, well below the rates recorded earlier in the year. Nevertheless, at 15 per cent, year-over-year growth in gross M1 remains strong. The year-over-year rates of increase in M1+ and M1++ have held steady over the last three months, at about 12 and 10 per cent, respectively. Special factors are keeping the rate of expansion of the narrow aggregates stronger than the underlying growth in transactions balances. It is estimated that deposits of financial institutions with banks and deposits of businesses and individuals at investment dealers continue to account for about 3 percentage points of the year-over-year growth in gross M1.
 
If the various data distortions are taken into account, the recent expansion in narrow money suggests that real GDP will grow at about 4 per cent in 2001 - stronger than the Bank's projection for GDP growth. The growth in the narrow money aggregates suggests that core inflation may move above the midpoint of the target range in 2001.
 
Year-over-year growth in the broad aggregate M2++ rose to 10 per cent in December. The strength of M2++ suggests a profile for core inflation slightly above that implied by the narrow aggregates.
 
The Bank held the Bank Rate constant at 6.0 per cent on 5 December, its first fixed announcement date, and lowered it to 5 3/4 per cent on its 23 January announcement date. Both decisions were largely anticipated by financial markets. Markets expect further declines in short-term interest rates between now and mid-year.
 
Over the past three months, the monetary conditions index has fluctuated between -6.7 and -5.5, reflecting the combination of declines in short-term interest rates and some firming of the Canadian dollar. The appreciation of the Canadian dollar in part reflects an adjustment of the US dollar against many major currencies in response to the slowdown of the US economy relative to other economies and the declines in US interest rates.
 
The term structure of interest rates on government debt has drifted lower in both Canada and the United States as market participants have become increasingly convinced that economic growth in the United States is slowing to a rate below potential. Yield spreads between Canadian and US government securities turned modestly positive for maturities of 2 to 30 years late in 2000 and have remained so since then.
 
Credit conditions faced by Canadian borrowers have been tightening somewhat as lenders have become more risk-averse at this point in the economic cycle.
 
In the United States, credit conditions have generally tightened more than in Canada, likely reflecting market sentiment about the extent of the US economic slowdown. Those conditions, reflected in credit spreads, have eased somewhat following the recent move by the Federal
 
Since the peaks established last summer, most of the world's major stock market indexes have declined. Movements in technology stocks have been particularly volatile. More recently, while most stock markets have risen, they remain well below their earlier peaks and volatility persists. Stock prices may now embody more realistic expectations of future profit growth, particularly in the technology sector. At the same time, the volatility in stock prices may reflect market participants' uncertainty about the future prospects for global economic expansion.