The global economy is regaining momentum. The downward revision to global growth in 2016 is mostly due to weaker-than-expected activity in the United States in the first half of the year. Looking ahead, solid domestic fundamentals should support a rebound in growth in US real gross domestic product. Globally, economic growth is projected to pick up from about 2 3/4 per cent in 2016 to about 3 1/2 per cent by 2018. Emerging-market economies are expected to drive this strengthening as recessions in certain countries run their course and progress is made on reforms to support growth.
 
Weak business investment and trade remain dominant themes in the global economic outlook. Global growth in investment has slowed since 2012, partly as a result of uncertainty over future prospects for global demand and ongoing structural adjustments in China.
 
Global financial conditions have remained broadly accommodative since the July Report, reflecting, in part, monetary policies. In an environment of still - low inflation and lacklustre growth, central banks in advanced economies have maintained or further eased their policy stances.
 
Yields in most advanced economies remain near record lows, despite an increase in long-term government bond yields in recent weeks. These low yields have been contributing to strong portfolio inflows and easier financing conditions in many EMEs. Meanwhile, global equity prices remain near recent highs. Corporate spreads have continued to decline since the July Report, and the issuance of global corporate debt has been strong.
 
Markets expect a very drawn-out normalization process for the policy interest rate in the United States. This normalization will contribute to monetary policy divergence among advanced economies. As it proceeds over the projection horizon, this normalization is likely to contribute to a steepening of yield curves in global markets.
 
The US economy is expected to strengthen in the second half of 2016, after growing more slowly than potential in the first half. After five successive quarters of being a drag on growth, inventory investment is expected to contribute positively in the second half. In addition, business investment should regain momentum. Specifically, a rising oil rig count suggests an improvement in energy investment. Residential investment also contracted in the second quarter as the composition of housing construction shifted toward smaller homes. It is expected to resume growing, in line with demographic demand for housing. Meanwhile, consumption growth has been strong, underpinned by robust consumer confidence and a strong labour market, with ongoing robust job gains over the past several years.
 
Economic growth is expected to pick up to about 2 per cent on average over 2017-18, as forecast in the July Report. However, the expected composition of growth has shifted. Business investment is projected to expand at a more moderate pace than previously forecast, and the profile for residential investment is expected to be lower. Offsetting these revisions is a slightly faster pace of consumption growth. Business investment is now projected to grow about 3 per cent per year over 2017-18, in line with the anticipated recovery in aggregate demand. Growth in exports should also pick up as the drag associated with the past appreciation of the US dollar continues to dissipate.
 
Core PCE (personal consumption expenditure) inflation has risen from its recent trough of 1.4 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2015 and is projected to reach 2 per cent by 2018, as wage pressures rise and the disinflationary effects of the past exchange rate appreciation ease.
 
The wider economic and geopolitical consequences of the United Kingdom's decision to exit the European Union continue to be difficult to forecast. The initial confidence effects associated with Brexit appear to have weighed less heavily on global economic activity than expected in July. The euro area, in particular, has been more resilient than anticipated, as illustrated by the strength in soft indicators, such as Purchasing Managers' Indexes and measures of economic sentiment.
 
In Japan, the recently announced fiscal stimulus should provide a modest boost to growth over the remainder of this year and throughout 2017. In addition, the Bank of Japan has introduced two major components into its monetary policy framework: "yield curve control," in which the BoJ will seek to control both short - and long-term interest rates; and an "inflation-overshooting commitment," in which the BoJ commits to expand the monetary base until consumer price inflation exceeds the 2 per cent target and remains stable above the target.
 
Growth in China is projected to slow gradually to 6.3 per cent by 2018. Previously announced fiscal support and rapid credit expansion appear to be boosting growth in spending on infrastructure and in the housing sector. While these developments are helping to replace some lost demand from slowing investment in mining and manufacturing industries, they may exacerbate financial vulnerabilities by increasing leverage, particularly in unprofitable state-owned enterprises.
 
In oil-importing EMEs, the associated drag on growth will wane as recessions in some countries, including Brazil, reach their troughs. Economic growth should also be supported by progress on growth-enhancing initiatives, such as major tax reforms in India and a pledge by Indonesian authorities to ramp up spending on infrastructure projects. The overall growth profile, however, has been marked down since July because weak global investment and the strengthening currencies of major EMEs are expected to restrain export growth.
 
The Bank continues to expect growth in the rest of the world to strengthen over the projection horizon as the ongoing adjustment to low oil prices in oil-exporting EMEs progresses.
 
Global oil price benchmarks have been fluctuating near levels assumed in the July Report. Prices for Western Canada Select - one of the main pricing benchmarks for Western Canadian producers - have been slightly lower, on average, mainly because of the resolution of production outages in Alberta. By convention, the Bank assumes that oil prices will remain near their recent average levels: about US$48, US$46 and US$32 for Brent, West Texas Intermediate and Western Canada Select, respectively.
 
Recent developments, including the production target proposed by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries , have influenced oil price movements, but have not materially changed the Bank's view on the pace of rebalancing in the oil market. In response to lower oil prices over the past two years, the supply adjustment is progressing. In this context, risks to the Bank's oil price assumption remain tilted to the upside over 2017-18: solid demand growth is expected to continue, while supply growth will be constrained by the deep cuts to capital investment over the past two years and the lag between oil investment and production.
 
The Bank of Canada's non-energy commodity price index is modestly lower than it was at the time of the July Report, driven mainly by weaker agricultural prices. Looking ahead, this index should remain near its current level, with movements in prices of different commodity components offsetting each other. A modest decline in metal prices is expected, reflecting slower growth in both investment and production in commodity-intensive industries in China, combined with strong supply growth from previously built mines in other countries. In contrast, lumber prices should remain elevated, with support from strong growth in the US housing market.
 
The adjustment of the Canadian economy to low commodity prices is progressing against a backdrop of weak but improving global demand. The drag from declining investment spending in the energy sector is waning, and there are early indications that economic activity in resource-related sectors may be bottoming out. The broader economic impact of lower real incomes from the commodity price decline is nonetheless expected to continue to dampen domestic demand for some time as this difficult adjustment proceeds. Meanwhile, activity outside resource sectors is growing at a solid pace, driven by an expanding service sector and supported by the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar. At the same time, subdued foreign demand and persistent competitiveness challenges are restraining the pace of export growth.
 
Real GDP is expected to grow at a rate above that of potential output, starting in the second half of 2016. Economic activity is supported by accommodative monetary and financial conditions and fiscal measures. The forecast for real GDP growth has been revised down since the July Report, primarily because of a weaker outlook for exports and the housing market. The output gap is now expected to close around mid-2018, materially later than anticipated in July.
 
The Bank expects inflation to be close to 2 per cent from early 2017 onward, when temporary factors will have dissipated and as economic slack is absorbed.
 
The Canadian economy contracted by 1.6 per cent (at an annualized rate) in the second quarter of 2016. Growth was pulled down by a large, broad-based decline in goods exports and the impact of the Alberta wildfires, which more than offset the strength in household expenditures and government spending. Weak exports of non-commodity goods can be linked, in part, to tepid foreign demand. US business investment has been very soft over the past three quarters, and activity in the US manufacturing sector - an important market for Canadian exports of intermediate goods - has grown slowly. Past declines in commodity prices, coupled with production disruptions, have also contributed to the weakness in commodity exports.
 
The economy is on track for a rebound in the second half of the year, reflecting improving exports, a return to full oil sands production and the rebuilding activity in Alberta. Real GDP increased in July across a number of industries, particularly non-conventional oil production. Goods exports posted gains in July and August, following a sharp contraction over the previous five months, but not enough to make up for previously lost ground. Looking through volatility in the data, service exports have steadily improved, but the level of goods exports has only returned to where it was a year ago. Underpinned by a pickup in the US economy, exports are expected to continue recovering.
 
In addition, the rollout of the Canada Child Benefit is anticipated to start providing additional support to household spending in the second half of 2016, and the federal infrastructure spending announced in March as part of Budget 2016 should begin to have a more material impact. However, the recently introduced federal measures to promote stability in the housing market are expected to start dampening resale activity in the near term.
 
Average growth over the third and fourth quarters of 2016 is expected to be about 2 1/2 per cent. This is lower than anticipated in the July Report, reflecting a downward revision to exports, a pullback in housing activity and a shift in the timing of the implementation of federal infrastructure measures that pushes some of the impact into 2017.
 
Estimates from the Bank's two measures of economic slack (the structural and statistical approaches) point to material excess capacity.  Responses to the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey indicate that pressures on production capacity are little changed and remain below their long-term average.
 
Statistics Canada's Labour Force Survey and the Survey of Employment, Payrolls and Hours, together with interprovincial migration data, continue to provide evidence of ongoing adjustment in labour markets to the past decline in commodity prices: employment is weak in energy-intensive regions and labour continues to migrate out of Alberta. In contrast, employment gains in the service sector, particularly in Ontario, British Columbia and Quebec, have been strong over the past year, and Ontario and British Columbia have seen provincial in-migration. Overall, the national labour market has been resilient.
 
Taking a range of measures into account, the Bank's labour market indicator has edged up and shows that there continues to be more economic slack than the national unemployment rate would suggest. The Bank judges that excess capacity in the economy in the third quarter was between 1 and 2 per cent.
 
Total CPI inflation remains in the lower half of the Bank's inflation-control range, with the temporary boost from the pass-through of the earlier exchange rate depreciation more than offset by downward pressures from low consumer energy prices and persistent excess capacity. Total inflation eased from 1.3 per cent in July to 1.1 per cent in August. This latest reading was weaker than anticipated, reflecting lower inflation for food and gasoline, as well as sector-specific shocks to telecommunications prices. Total CPI inflation is expected to move up over the coming months as gasoline prices exert less downward pressure.
 
Most measures of core inflation remain close to 2 per cent but have eased somewhat since the July Report. Without the impact of exchange rate pass-through, these measures would be somewhat lower, reflecting disinflationary pressures associated with ongoing economic slack.
 
The adjustment in industries most affected by commodity prices is well under way, and activity in the rest of the economy is expanding solidly. In response to persistently lower prices, oil firms have been cutting capital expenditures and reducing labour. The investment cuts are expected to diminish toward the end of 2016, leaving investment in the oil and gas sector about 60 per cent below its level in 2014. The autumn Business Outlook Survey found that many businesses believe resource-related activity may be bottoming out. Resource-related firms generally expect sales to level off at this new lower level or to increase modestly over the next 12 months.
 
An integral part of the economy's adjustment to the commodity price shock is the relatively solid growth in the service sector, which is supporting job creation, incomes and domestic demand. Moreover, Business Outlook Survey responses indicate that the balance of opinion on firms' assessments of the impact of the lower Canadian dollar and weaker commodity prices on their business outlook has shifted from very negative to positive over the past five quarters.
 
Real GDP is projected to grow by 1.1 per cent in 2016 and about 2 per cent in 2017 and 2018. The Bank expects solid household spending to continue to be the main contributor to growth, with additional support from government spending and exports in 2017. The contribution from business investment is anticipated to turn positive by the start of 2017 and to subsequently increase.
 
Exports are expected to pick up and grow at a moderate pace over the projection horizon as foreign demand improves. Together with services exports, several goods components, such as aircraft and related parts and pharmaceutical and medicinal products, are expected to lead the recovery in non-commodity exports. In addition, Canadian oil production and exports are expected to post gains over the projection horizon, although the declines in energy sector investment that followed the oil price shock will restrain the pace of growth over the next two years. In the non-energy commodity sector, there could be downside risks to Canadian lumber exports, if the United States imposes countervailing duties following the expiration of the Softwood Lumber Agreement.
 
The average rate of growth projected for exports over 2017 and 2018 is lower than anticipated in July. The projection for US economic activity now has slower business investment growth and a lower track for residential investment, reflecting the trend to smaller houses. In addition, the persistent weakness in Canadian non-commodity goods exports this year suggests that competitiveness challenges will be more pronounced than previously anticipated. The downward revision to exports, including spillovers to domestic demand and imports, lowers real GDP by 0.6 per cent by the end of 2018.
 
One issue that appears to be more important than previously assessed is the competitiveness of Canada against other countries in the US market. US non-energy goods imports from Canada have stagnated, while those from competing countries have increased. The foreign exchange value of the Canadian dollar is one relevant factor: although the Canadian dollar depreciated against the US dollar in recent years, which improved Canada's export competitiveness, competitors for US market share have also experienced currency depreciations, in some cases by more than that for the Canadian dollar. The Mexican peso, for example, has fallen by over 30 per cent against the US dollar since mid-2014, compared with less than 20 per cent for the Canadian dollar. The Canadian-dollar exchange rate will continue to support the level of exports, although most of the impact on the growth rate has likely already occurred.
 
Other factors, such as energy cost differentials, rising non-tariff trade barriers, uncertainty about the status of current and future trade agreements, and slow and complex project approval processes, may also be impeding Canada's ability to benefit from an improving global outlook. These factors also affect firms' choice of location for production: exporting firms have been able to respond to increases in export demand through their foreign facilities located close to the source of demand rather than exclusively through Canadian exports. In this context, persistent productivity underperformance and stronger relative wage gains in Canada have been working to gradually erode the competitiveness of Canadian exports, despite the depreciation of the Canadian dollar in recent years.
 
The outlook for exports remains subject to considerable uncertainty, which has significant implications for the economic projection. For example, growth in exports that is 1 percentage point weaker than expected in both 2017 and 2018 could lower the level of real GDP by as much as 0.5 per cent by the end of the projection horizon. In this simulation as well as in the base-case projection, the direct impact of weaker exports on GDP is mitigated by the fewer imports needed as inputs into exports.
 
While the weaker profile for exports in the base-case projection will translate into somewhat softer business investment, growth in investment is expected to turn positive in 2017 and to gradually pick up over the projection horizon. The autumn Business Outlook Survey results show that more firms than in recent surveys plan to increase investment over the next 12 months. Plans to increase investment are more widespread among service-oriented firms and often involve smaller-scale expenditures on information technology. Intentions to increase investment remain weak among firms in the more investment-intensive manufacturing sector. As exports increase and more firms start to face capacity constraints, investment in the non-commodity sector is still expected to rise.
 
National growth in household spending has held up as employment and income have continued to rise outside the energy-intensive provinces. While the negative wealth and income effects from the past decline in Canada's terms of trade will continue to restrain household spending, accommodative monetary policy is an ongoing source of support. Consumption should continue to grow at a healthy pace, with government transfers providing a boost in the near term and the adverse impact of the past deterioration of the terms of trade slowly dissipating.
 
Residential investment was strong in the first half of 2016, particularly in the housing markets in British Columbia and Ontario. A slowdown in resale activity in British Columbia that began in May intensified in August. An additional property transfer tax for foreign buyers in the Greater Vancouver Regional District was also introduced in August. Nonetheless, prices in Vancouver remain elevated, and resale activity and housing starts continue to be robust in the Greater Toronto Area. The recently announced federal measures to promote stability in the housing market are expected to lead to weaker resale activity in the near term and a modest change in the composition of residential construction toward smaller units. These measures leave the level of real GDP 0.3 per cent lower at the end of 2018. In line with these changes, the contribution of residential investment to real GDP growth is expected to be lower on average than anticipated in July. While household indebtedness has continued to increase, the new measures are expected to dampen household vulnerabilities over time, in part, by improving the average credit quality of new borrowing.
 
Fiscal stimulus will be an important contributor to GDP growth, with household transfers and infrastructure measures having an overall impact of 1 per cent on the level of GDP by the end of the 2017-18 fiscal year.
 
The disinflationary effect of low consumer energy prices and the inflationary effect of exchange rate pass-through are expected to largely dissipate by the end of 2016. Total inflation is expected to be close to 2 per cent in 2017 and 2018. Remaining excess capacity will continue to be a source of modest disinflationary pressure through 2017 and into 2018.
 
The profile for inflation is slightly lower than expected in July, since in the base-case projection the output gap is now somewhat wider and is expected to close later than previously anticipated.
 
Inflation expectations remain well anchored. The October Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation was 1.5 per cent for 2016 and 2.1 per cent for 2017. A semi-annual question on long-term inflation expectations shows inflation averaging 2 per cent through 2025. Results from the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey indicate that firms' expectations for inflation over the next two years remain within the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range.
 
Based on the past dispersion of private sector forecasts, a reasonable range around the base-case projection for total CPI inflation is ±0.3 percentage points. This range is intended to convey a sense of forecast uncertainty. A fan chart, which is derived using statistical analysis of the Bank's forecast errors, provides a complementary perspective.
 
With this Report, the content and format of the Risks section have been revised. More information is provided on developments related to risks - both what has happened since the previous Report and what is being monitored in the near term. This information highlights the indicators being monitored but is not necessarily comprehensive. It will help clarify the Bank's assessment of when a risk may be receding and will likely be dropped in a future Report; when a risk may become less important because aspects of it may be materializing, leading to a revision to the economic projection; or when the nature of a risk may be changing, for example, from being one - to two-sided. The evolution of the risks since the previous Report is summarized in Table 4.
 
The outlook for inflation is subject to several upside and downside risks emanating from both the external environment and the domestic economy. Overall, the Bank assesses that the risks to the projected path for inflation are roughly balanced. As in past reports, the focus is on a selection of risks identified as the most important for the projected path for inflation, drawing from a larger set of risks taken into account in the projection.
 
The Bank's projection for US potential GDP growth could reflect an overly conservative interpretation of labour market and productivity trends. In addition, global uncertainty has increased recently, exacerbated by heightened political uncertainty and rising protectionist sentiment. Either favourable dissipation of this uncertainty or stronger growth in the structural drivers of the US economy could result in improved US business confidence and investment, with positive spillovers for Canadian exports.
 
Strengthening demand, as well as supply constraints, could contribute to higher oil prices. Higher-than-expected oil prices would improve Canada's terms of trade and provide a boost to wealth and household spending in Canada.
 
The recent weakness in business investment could reflect more persistent structural factors. Over time, weaker business investment would also reduce capital deepening and lower potential output, partially mitigating the disinflationary effect of weaker demand.
 
Growth could be slower in some EMEs, particularly commodity exporters and those with elevated US-dollar-denominated debt. There are risks around China's rebalancing, particularly given a further buildup of financial imbalances. Slower EME growth could affect Canada through weaker commodity prices and export sales, as well as through greater global uncertainty and financial volatility.
 
Given the high level of household indebtedness, households may also become more prudent, restraining consumption and housing expenditures. Weaker-than-expected household spending would have a direct negative impact on real GDP.