The global economic expansion is expected to strengthen over the next three years as headwinds that have been restraining activity dissipate. Fiscal consolidation in many advanced economies, which has been a heavy drag on global growth, has diminished significantly. Private deleveraging also appears well advanced. Uncertainty about future demand is receding and monetary policy continues to be highly stimulative. This is creating favourable financial conditions for a rebound in household and business spending. Economic reforms are also anticipated to support and help rebalance growth in a number of economies over time.
 
Stronger demand should boost global trade, helping to lay the foundation for self-sustaining economic growth. Trade has been restrained by a number of factors, including modest investment growth in many advanced economies, and notable increases in trade restrictions.  Recent trade data show tentative signs of improvement, however, and suggest that some of these factors have started to unwind.
 
Global economic growth is expected to increase from 2.9 per cent in 2013 to 3.3 per cent in 2014 and 3.7 per cent in 2015 and 2016 - largely unchanged relative to the January Report. In this context, a number of commodity prices that are important for Canada's terms of trade appear to be well supported. While the risks to the global outlook appear roughly balanced, and remain lower than in earlier periods, there is increased concern about the sustainability of growth in China and other emerging-market economies , persistently low inflation in advanced economies, and recent geopolitical events.
 
Global financial conditions continue to support growth, against the backdrop of a gradual tapering of asset purchases by the US Federal Reserve. In advanced economies, financial conditions are buoyant. Yields on long-term government bonds are broadly unchanged since the last Report and remain low by historical standards, while many equity markets are near all-time highs. Credit conditions for firms, especially in the United States, continue to be accommodative, with low corporate spreads encouraging strong debt issuance.
 
Meanwhile, in emerging-market economies, financial conditions have tightened, and market volatility has increased, partly in response to political uncertainty. Nevertheless, volatility has remained well below historical averages.
 
Economies with weaker fundamentals have experienced the largest deterioration in financial conditions, and several central banks in EMEs have been forced to boost policy interest rates in an effort to stabilize markets.
 
The US economy is expected to gather momentum, with growth projected to increase from around 2 per cent in 2013 to average around 3 per cent over the next three years. Based on the past dispersion of private sector forecasts, US economic growth in 2014 is expected to fall within ± 0.5 percentage points of the Bank's projection, with a somewhat wider range in 2015 and 2016.
 
Following robust growth in the second half of 2013, the pace of the US economic expansion in early 2014 has slowed abruptly. Unseasonably cold weather and severe snowstorms led to temporary supply-chain disruptions, a reduction in construction activity and a delay in some consumer expenditures. Much of this activity is expected to be recovered, as demonstrated by the recent rebound in motor vehicle sales, purchasing managers' indexes and employment.
 
The Bank expects that US output growth will accelerate as the dampening effects of household deleveraging, fiscal consolidation and uncertainty dissipate. Although the US Federal Reserve reduced the pace of its monthly asset purchases at its meeting in March, from $65 billion to $55 billion, monetary policy continues to ease. The recent policy announcement from the Federal Open Market Committee moved from quantitative to qualitative guidance and also suggested that monetary policy will remain accommodative "even after employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels."
 
In this context, private domestic demand is expected to strengthen. Rising household wealth and improving labour market conditions are projected to drive consumer spending. A strong recovery in the housing market is also anticipated to continue, albeit at a slightly slower pace than projected in January, as tight mortgage-lending standards and difficult labour market conditions for younger workers dampen household formation.
 
This pickup in demand should, in turn, result in greater business investment. In light of reduced policy and economic uncertainty, there is an upside risk that consumers and businesses (particularly given the healthy state of corporate balance sheets) could increase spending at a more rapid pace than projected. Such a scenario would have broad positive spillover effects on the global economy.
 
Net exports are expected to exert a small drag on US economic growth over the projection horizon. Rising foreign demand for exports will be outweighed by even faster import growth driven by strong domestic demand. Non-energy imports are expected to rise, while increased US production of oil and natural gas will continue to push energy imports lower.
 
Persistent and significant excess capacity in many advanced economies has pushed inflation well below policy targets. In the euro area, despite a strengthening and broadening of growth following progress in deleveraging, inflation has continued to decline, and inflation expectations have shifted down significantly. While inflation is expected to rise gradually over the projection horizon as excess supply is absorbed, there is a risk that disinflation could continue, and perhaps even develop into deflation. If this were to occur, it would threaten the expansion by increasing real debt burdens and leading households and businesses to delay expenditures. In addition, the Russia-Ukraine situation represents an important downside risk to Europe's fragile recovery.
 
Meanwhile, in Japan, subdued inflation also remains a risk, despite an important pickup in both total and core inflation over the past year following the introduction of aggressive monetary easing. Recently, domestic demand has been particularly strong, with the pulling forward of consumption ahead of the increase in the value-added tax in April. However, progress toward Japan's inflation target will require continued momentum in economic activity.
 
In China, economic growth is projected to remain between 7 and 7 1/2 per cent over the next three years. The authorities are expected to encourage a rotation of demand away from investment and toward consumption, while reining in credit growth. There is, however, considerable uncertainty about how this rotation will unfold. There is a risk that the property market in China could cool faster than anticipated as credit slows. Given the close links among banks, property developers and the shadow banking sector, weakness in the housing sector could cause serious financial system stress and depress real economic activity.
 
Heightened uncertainty and tightening financial conditions are expected to restrain growth in other EMEs in the first half of this year. Activity is then anticipated to strengthen as external demand picks up, and as further progress is made on economic reforms. Nevertheless, as global financial conditions normalize, investors will continue to reassess the prospects for EMEs. This could lead to increased volatility, capital outflows and severe financial market turbulence. Such a scenario would dampen global demand, commodity prices and Canada's terms of trade.
 
Recent supply developments have supported energy and agricultural prices. West Texas Intermediate prices have increased by 10 per cent since the January Report, as easing transportation constraints have substantially lowered inventories at Cushing compared with last year. Agricultural prices have surged since January. Prices for grain products have risen, reflecting droughts in South America and parts of the United States, and the turmoil in Ukraine. Cattle and hog prices have also moved sharply higher, owing to concerns about depleted herd sizes and a deadly virus attacking piglets. At the same time, there has been downward pressure on base metals prices, particularly copper, reflecting concerns about slowing demand in China.
 
It is important to note that the Bank has changed its working assumption for the profile of energy prices in its base-case projection. Whereas in the past the Bank had assumed that energy prices would follow the futures curves, it now assumes that energy prices will remain near their current levels. Recent empirical work has shown that this approach provides a more accurate forecast, on average, than the futures curve and is also consistent with the technical assumption the Bank uses for the exchange rate. Prices for Brent, West Texas Intermediate and Western Canada Select have recently averaged approximately US$107, US$101 and US$80, respectively.
 
Historical experience suggests that there is a wide band of uncertainty around any forecast of energy prices, and that the risks around it need not be symmetrically distributed. The Bank's latest analysis of demand and supply factors suggests that the risks are likely tilted to the downside. In particular, if US shale oil production were to exceed current estimates, and some members of OPEC were to bring production back on line more rapidly than anticipated, prices would likely fall below the level assumed in the base case.
 
Prices for many non-energy commodities are expected to rise with the pickup in global activity. Consistent with the expected high level of oil prices, Canada's terms of trade should remain elevated.
 
The anticipated improvement in global economic growth, particularly in US business and residential investment, is expected to lift Canadian exports over the projection horizon. Rising global demand for non-energy commodities, combined with the assumed high level of oil prices, should support Canadian investment.
 
The Canadian dollar has averaged approximately 91 cents US since the March fixed announcement date, in line with the assumption in January. By convention, the Canadian dollar is assumed to remain at its recent level of 91 cents US over the projection horizon.
 
The fundamental determinants of growth and inflation in Canada continue to strengthen gradually, as anticipated in the January Report. Although recent data for inflation were slightly higher than expected, excess supply in the economy and heightened competition in the retail sector will likely keep core inflation well below 2 per cent this year. Total CPI inflation is now forecast to be higher than core inflation over the coming quarters and closer to the 2 per cent target. This principally reflects observed and expected increases in consumer energy prices, which have a temporary effect on the inflation rate. Underlying forces therefore need to be in place to close the output gap and cause core inflation to rise; otherwise, total inflation would drift back down below the target. The Bank expects that, as excess capacity is gradually absorbed and the effects of competition wane, core inflation will return to 2 per cent by early 2016. Given this projected dynamic, the Bank expects that total inflation will reach 2 per cent by early next year and will remain there for the rest of the projection period.
 
Economic growth in Canada is projected to average about 2 1/2 per cent in 2014 and 2015. The Bank continues to expect that the gradual strengthening of the global economy and the recent depreciation of the Canadian dollar will lead to a broadening of the composition of growth in Canada. Meanwhile, recent developments are in line with the Bank's expectation of a soft landing in the housing market and stabilizing debt-to-income  ratios for households. This outlook is broadly unchanged from the January Report. The effects of the higher profile for oil prices on the terms of trade and, in turn, consumption are largely offset by recent information suggesting some further delay in the pickup in exports and business investment.
 
By 2016, real GDP growth in Canada is anticipated to slow to closer to 2 per cent, which corresponds to the Bank's estimate for the growth rate of potential output. However, there is the usual degree of uncertainty as to what the precise path of potential output growth will be over the coming years. In part, this is because potential output responds to stronger aggregate demand through increased business investment, firm creation and greater labour force participation.
 
The Bank's core measure of inflation has remained subdued, fluctuating within a narrow range and averaging about 1.2 per cent since the latter part of 2012. Weak inflation has been observed across a broad range of core goods and services, and the effects are therefore evident in all measures of core inflation that the Bank monitors. While the Bank's target is based on total CPI inflation, these core measures allow the Bank to focus on the underlying trend of inflation by excluding price movements that can temporarily affect total CPI inflation.
 
The fundamental factor behind the weak core inflation numbers is the persistent slack in the Canadian economy. The estimated impact of excess supply on inflation is even stronger once the effects of sector-specific price movements are removed. Taking into account the various indicators of capacity pressures and the uncertainty surrounding any point estimates, the Bank judges that the amount of excess supply in the first quarter of 2014 was still material, at between 1/2 per cent and 1 1/2 per cent. This is slightly less than estimated in the January Report. Labour market indicators, including subdued wage increases, are consistent with the persistence of material excess supply in the economy. Heightened competition in the retail sector, especially for core food items and non-durable goods, also remains a key contributor to subdued core inflation.
 
The depreciation of the Canadian dollar over the past year has put some temporary upward pressure on inflation, partially offsetting the impact of excess supply and retail competition. The lower Canadian dollar also appears to have reduced the gap between Canadian and US consumer prices, suggesting less scope for downward price pressure in some price components. The Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey indicates that firms are already noticing an increase in the prices of non-labour inputs, although many note that intense competition may limit the extent to which these costs will be passed on to consumer prices.
 
While total CPI inflation has lately averaged about the same rate as core inflation, recent indicators suggest that several of the volatile components will push up total CPI inflation close to the target in the coming quarters. In particular, energy prices are expected to increase noticeably, owing not only to higher gasoline prices but also to a sharp rise in natural gas prices. The depreciation of the Canadian dollar is also contributing to the divergence between core and total inflation, since some of the key volatile components excluded from the core measure are particularly sensitive to exchange rate movements.
 
While core inflation is projected to increase as the impact of retail competition gradually fades, the economy will need to have reached its full capacity for inflation to be maintained at the 2 per cent target. Above-potential growth is therefore needed to close the output gap; this is expected to be achieved with a larger contribution to growth from exports and investment.
 
While energy exports were stronger in 2013 than previously anticipated, non-energy export categories have continued to underperform relative to foreign activity. Competitiveness challenges have weighed on exports, as evidenced by the further losses in Canada's market share. In addition, supply constraints in some export sectors, or an increased reliance on the foreign affiliates of Canadian firms to fulfill foreign demand, might have played a role. Weakness in Canadian non-energy exports is broadly in line with the sharp slowing in global trade since 2011. Some of the weakness in recent months may also be due to weather-related factors.
 
Given the continued strengthening in global growth, particularly the firmer and more broadly based growth in the United States, Canada's non-energy exports are expected to gather momentum in coming quarters. A wide range of export sectors are expected to benefit, including those linked to US construction activity, such as logging and building materials. As US investment in machinery and equipment strengthens, export sectors, such as industrial, electrical and electronic machinery and equipment, computers, and aircraft, should strengthen. The contribution of other sectors that have performed well over the past decade relative to foreign activity, such as commercial services and pharmaceutical products, should continue. The recent depreciation of the Canadian dollar, which has reversed a small part of the earlier deterioration in Canada's competitiveness, should help to promote stronger growth in exports.
 
Although there are some encouraging signs, it is likely that the long lags involved in re-establishing supply chains and sales networks, as well as continued competitiveness challenges, will weigh on the ability of Canadian firms to benefit from stronger growth abroad. The Bank's base-case projection therefore continues to assume that non-commodity exports will grow at a somewhat slower pace than foreign demand.
 
Energy exports, which were hampered in 2013 by temporary production shutdowns and transportation bottlenecks, are expected to strengthen in 2014 and to grow at a faster pace than foreign demand. This reflects announced plans by major producers to increase output, the growing use of Canadian heavy oil in US refineries and further growth in rail transportation capacity. The higher level of energy prices should also increase revenues and profits in the resource sector. Indeed, recent data suggest a noticeable rise in the terms of trade in the first quarter.
 
As exports strengthen and uncertainty about future demand diminishes, growth in business investment is expected to rise gradually. The most recent survey by Statistics Canada reports only a modest increase in business investment intentions for 2014, with the notable exception of the manufacturing sector, where a significant pickup is expected. Nonetheless, healthy corporate balance sheets and the low cost of capital are providing solid support. Business credit growth remains above its historical average, and the Bank's most recent Business Outlook and Senior Loan Officer surveys suggest that credit conditions have eased slightly in recent months. In addition, some indicators of business sentiment have improved in recent quarters. According to the latest results from the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey, intentions regarding investment in machinery and equipment have turned positive for export-oriented manufacturing firms, notably those related to capital goods and transportation equipment.
 
Overall, total exports are expected to pick up, but their profile is lower than in the January Report. This is mainly due to weaker-than-expected exports in early 2014 and a somewhat more subdued profile for foreign activity, particularly for US residential investment. With a slightly more modest outlook for exports, the profile for business investment in the Bank's base-case scenario is lower than in January.
 
The economy will also continue to be supported by moderate growth in consumer spending over the projection horizon, broadly in line with the growth of household disposable income and the savings rate near its current level.
 
Residential investment is expected to remain relatively unchanged as its share of the overall economy declines to a more sustainable level. Over the past several years, Canadian homeowners have been saving on their payments when renewing their fixed-rate mortgages. However, since interest rates have been low for a long time, this effect will soon level off. The profile for household spending is consistent with credit growth remaining well below the historical average and a stabilization of household debt-to-income ratios over the projection horizon.
 
Overall, real GDP growth is projected to average around 2 1/2 per cent in 2014 and 2015, before easing close to the growth rate in the economy's potential output of 2 per cent in 2016. Given the degree of uncertainty inherent in projections, the Bank judges that GDP growth will likely be within ± 0.5 percentage points of the base-case projection in 2014, with a somewhat wider range in 2015 and 2016.
 
With the projected profile for real GDP growth exceeding the growth of potential output, the Bank expects that the economy will gradually return to its full production capacity over the next two years. The growth rate of potential output is expected to remain fairly stable, at around 2 per cent, with a rise in the growth rate of trend labour productivity being offset by a further decline in the growth of trend labour input, associated with demographic forces.
 
The projected rise in trend labour productivity assumes benefits from the growth in business investment that will contribute to further capital deepening. However, the future path for potential output could deviate from that projected in the base-case scenario. In particular, the contribution of trend labour productivity growth will depend on many factors, notably, the strength of the demand for Canadian goods and services, the amount invested by existing firms in research and development and technology, and the number of new firms created. For example, greater-than-anticipated foreign demand for Canadian exports could translate into increased business investment and net firm creation, which could result in higher productivity and potential output.
 
Core inflation is projected to remain just above 1 per cent in the first half of 2014 and to return gradually to 2 per cent by early 2016, as excess capacity is absorbed and the impact of increased competition dissipates. Anecdotal evidence suggests that competition effects could last longer than previously assumed. The lower Canadian dollar, in contrast, is expected to continue to exert some upward pressure on inflation over the next few quarters. This upward pressure comes from direct effects on the prices of imported goods and services, as well as indirect effects through higher demand.
 
Total CPI inflation is projected to remain above core inflation until around the end of next year, mainly reflecting higher energy prices. While total CPI inflation is projected to remain above core inflation and close to the target, there is much uncertainty about its profile, given that the total CPI incorporates movements in very volatile components such as gasoline and natural gas prices. As an example, if the base-case scenario were to assume that oil prices were 10 per cent lower , total CPI inflation would be lower by 0.3 percentage points over the coming year. Moreover, there is uncertainty about the extent to which the impact of recent depreciation in the Canadian dollar on inflation will be offset by the effects of competition.
 
The Bank uses core inflation as an operational guide to look through inflation movements that are likely to be temporary. Excess supply must be absorbed to prevent total CPI inflation from falling back below the 2 per cent target once the effects of volatile components unwind.
 
The higher profile for total CPI inflation should reinforce the anchoring of inflation expectations at the 2 per cent target. Indicators of short-term inflation expectations are somewhat below the Bank's projection. The March Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation was 1.5 per cent for 2014 and 1.9 per cent for 2015. Similarly, over 90 per cent of the firms surveyed in the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey expect inflation to be within the 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range, with the majority in the bottom half of the range. Market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations also remain consistent with the 2 per cent target.
 
Based on the past dispersion of private sector forecasts, a reasonable range around the base-case projection for total inflation in 2014 is ± 0.3 percentage points. This range is intended to measure ex ante forecast uncertainty. Fan charts, which are derived using statistical analysis of ex post errors from the Bank's projection models, provide a complementary perspective. Chart 19 and Chart 20 show the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the second quarter of 2014 to the end of 2016. The degree of uncertainty around the inflation forecast, and the range of weaker-than-projected outcomes in particular, are important considerations for policy in light of the low level of core inflation.
 
The outlook for inflation is subject to several risks emanating from both the external environment and the domestic economy. The Bank judges that the risks to the projected inflation path are roughly balanced.
 
The most important risks to inflation are:
 
Stronger-than-expected private demand in the United States is the most important upside risk to inflation in Canada. With strong corporate balance sheets and reduced uncertainty, businesses could boost investment by more than expected as they take advantage of firming demand. Similarly, as deleveraging dissipates, consumer spending could accelerate at a stronger pace. Each of these scenarios would boost economic activity and confidence more generally, leading to positive spillover effects throughout the US economy. Stronger US activity would in turn translate into higher exports for Canada and firmer commodity prices. In addition, private domestic demand in Canada would benefit from positive effects on confidence.
 
A wide range of export sectors are expected to benefit from the continued strengthening of the US economy. This realignment of export growth with foreign activity will also be aided by the recent depreciation of the Canadian dollar. To date, however, the anticipated rebound in non-energy exports has proven to be elusive. The precise timing of the realignment in growth is highly uncertain and could take longer than currently anticipated by the Bank. A slower recovery in non-energy exports would also translate into slower growth in business investment, particularly investment in machinery and equipment. Together, weaker exports and business investment would pose a downside risk to inflation.
 
Efforts by the Chinese authorities to address vulnerabilities in the shadow banking sector and engineer a soft landing in the real estate sector could result in a greater-than-anticipated slowdown in credit growth and an extended period of deleveraging that would weigh on growth. There is also a risk that increased political uncertainty in other EMEs, lack of progress on economic reforms and/or uncertainty surrounding the impact of the normalization of US monetary policy could trigger larger capital outflows and tighter credit conditions. These shocks could have negative spillover effects on the global economy and would be transmitted to the Canadian economy through weaker exports, lower commodity prices and a deterioration in the terms of trade.
 
Recent housing data continue to support the Bank's base-case scenario of a soft landing. Housing starts have generally been below the Bank's estimate of demographic demand for over a year, and resale activity has also been below its 10-year average since November 2013. However, high levels of debt and near-record house prices relative to income continue to leave households vulnerable to adverse shocks. The risk of a disorderly unwinding of household sector imbalances, should it materialize, could have sizable spillover effects on other parts of the economy and on inflation.