In the last half-year, the economic expansion in Canada has become well established, supported by low inflation, highly stimulative monetary conditions, and a strong US economy. These positive factors have more than offset the dampening effects that fiscal restraint and private and public sector restructuring have had on spending and consumer confidence.
 
Private sector activity has been moving ahead briskly, with household spending and business investment in machinery and equipment leading the way. In addition, strong growth in world trade has supported a rising trend in Canadian exports. Consequently, economic slack has been taken up more rapidly than in the second half of last year.
 
These developments have been broadly in line with expectations set out in the last Report, where it was concluded that the highly stimulative monetary conditions of the past two years would no longer be necessary as the economy gained momentum and moved towards full resource utilization. Consistent with this assessment, in early summer the Bank acted to counter an easing in monetary conditions stemming from persistent weakness in the exchange rate. In early autumn further action was taken, this time to moderate the extent of monetary stimulus in the economy.
 
With the economy now gathering strong momentum and the influences of restructuring and past fiscal policy measures becoming increasingly less pronounced, the challenge for monetary policy is to promote a level of monetary conditions that preserves low inflation and thereby contributes to making this economic expansion a long-lasting one.
 
Over the past six months, core CPI inflation has shown little change, remaining in the lower half of the Bank's inflation-control target range. The downward pressure on inflation coming from slack in product markets has been partly offset by efforts in a few sectors to boost profit margins.
 
As anticipated in last May's Report, the 12-month rate of increase in the core CPI has remained in the lower half of the inflation-control target range. As of September 1997, core inflation was 1.5 per cent compared with 1.7 per cent last March. Other statistical measures of trend inflation convey the same message.
 
Even so, core inflation has been slightly higher than was expected six months ago. The downward pressure on inflation from excess capacity has been partly offset by efforts to restore profit margins in retailing and certain other consumer-oriented sectors. In addition, as inflation expectations in recent years have become more heavily influenced by the inflation target and less sensitive to past inflation, the overall downward pressure from slack in the economy may, in effect, have been somewhat lessened.
 
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was 1.6 per cent in September 1997, compared with 2.0 per cent in March. Energy prices, after some easing in the spring related to earlier reductions in producer prices, strengthened towards the end of the summer because of temporary gasoline shortages in North America.
 
Other broad measures of inflation have fallen significantly since the last Report, largely because of the impact of a decline in the terms of trade - the price of exports relative to the price of imports. In particular, the export prices of crude oil, natural gas, and wheat all fell considerably during the first half of 1997. The rate of increase in the fixed-weight gross domestic product deflator was 0.8 per cent in the second quarter of 1997 on a year-over-year basis, as was the rate of increase in the chain price index for GDP excluding inventories - a measure of price changes using weights that adjust to keep up with shifts in the composition of spending.
 
The pace of economic expansion picked up in the first half of 1997, largely as anticipated. Over this period, real GDP rose at an annual rate of 4.3 per cent, after a gain of 3.1 per cent over the second half of 1996. The expansion has been supported by strong growth in the US economy and the accommodative monetary conditions that were necessary to offset the restraint on aggregate demand that had come from measures to reduce fiscal deficits and from private sector restructuring. With momentum in the economy building, labour market activity also picked up, and employment rose substantially.
 
The strong recovery in household expenditures, which began last year, continued in the first half of 1997, even though there was little change in real personal disposable income because of higher tax payments. These higher taxes stemmed largely from special factors such as a high level of realized capital gains, the introduction of an accelerated program for collecting employment insurance premiums, and higher contribution rates for the Canada Pension Plan and Quebec Pension Plan. Consumer spending on big-ticket items such as housing, motor vehicles, and other consumer durables was particularly robust, fuelled by low interest rates and pent-up demand. The rise in spending left the personal savings rate at a postwar low, but the net worth of the household sector continued to increase significantly in the first half of the year owing to capital gains.
 
The pickup in employment growth in the last two quarters contributed to the improving environment for the personal sector and, hence, to a further pronounced recovery in consumer confidence. Gains in private sector employment have been broadly based, both by province and by industry. An increase in the labour force participation rate (the percentage of those of working age who are in the labour force) since last March also points to improved labour market conditions.
 
Spending by businesses on capital goods remained strong in the first six months of 1997. These expenditures were again focussed on improving efficiency and expanding capacity. Furthermore, after having been concentrated in machinery and equipment earlier, the increase in expenditures has broadened to include spending on structures. In particular, the oil and gas sector boosted investment outlays considerably, mainly in response to the earlier surge in energy prices.
 
Inventory levels remained in good balance. Encouraged by higher sales levels, companies in both the manufacturing and wholesale trade sectors continued to increase their stocks in the first half of the year.
 
The growth of exports resumed in the first half of 1997 in response to a strong US economy and the resolution of labour disputes in the automobile industry in October 1996. US demand was led by business investment in machinery and equipment and by consumer demand. Canadian exports of automobiles in the second quarter of 1997 were adversely affected by temporary parts shortages, however.
 
The robust recovery in both domestic demand and exports contributed to a further substantial increase in import volumes in the first half of 1997. The increased demand was again concentrated in components such as machinery and equipment and consumer purchases of motor vehicles, most of which tend to be imported. Imports of industrial parts and materials continued to increase strongly. This largely reflects the growth in export volumes linked to the expansion of two-way trade following various trade liberalization agreements over the past 10 years.
 
The current account of Canada's balance of payments has returned to a modest deficit position over the past year, largely in response to strong growth in domestic demand for import-intensive items and a deterioration in the terms of trade. Nevertheless, on balance, the current account position has improved considerably since 1994, mainly because of the increased competitiveness of Canadian firms and the relatively stronger growth of external demand.
 
Overall, demand continued to grow faster in the first half of 1997 than the Bank's estimate of the economy's capacity to produce. As a result, the Bank calculates that the output gap narrowed to about 1 per cent at midyear, down from about 2 per cent at the end of 1996. Such estimates, it should be noted, are imprecise and should be viewed as points within a wide confidence band. Moreover, they are subject to frequent review as the flow of economic information is received.
 
In the first half of 1997, firms continued to make concerted efforts to keep unit cost increases low and to improve productivity.
 
Wages, the largest component of total costs, again rose at a moderate pace, with gains largely consistent with productivity increases. Annual wage settlements in the unionized private sector averaged 2.4 per cent, compared with 2.1 per cent in the second half of 1996. The average pay increase for most non-unionized employees was 2.6 per cent in 1997, according to the Conference Board of Canada's compensation outlook survey. Overall, based on these and other measures, underlying wage increases (i.e., excluding such factors as changes in the composition of employment) in the private sector appear to have been in a range between 2 and 2.5 per cent on a year-over-year basis. Average wage settlements in the public sector remained low (0.9 per cent). Thus, the average underlying wage increase in the total economy is estimated to have been somewhat below 2 per cent.
 
Productivity (output per person-hour) rose substantially in the first half of 1997, partly because of the cyclical pickup in output. As a result, the year-over-year rise in unit labour costs remained very low. Much of the increase in labour income per person-hour (excluding the self-employed) likely reflected the ongoing shift in the composition of employment towards higher-paid occupations and the timing of irregular bonus payments.
 
Over the past six months, core inflation has been somewhat higher than anticipated, partly because of factors that are not expected to have a lasting effect on inflation. For instance, profit margins in some consumer-related sectors (such as retailing and air transportation) have improved because the recovery in household spending has permitted less-generous price discounting. The resulting rise in prices for such items as air fares and some semi-durable goods (e.g., clothing) has been large enough to have a noticeable impact on the core CPI. Now that profit margins in these sectors are closer to normal levels, there is less likelihood of further significant price-level increases and, hence, of an ongoing effect on inflation.
 
Some temporary influences on the core CPI have been working in the opposite direction. For example, automobile manufacturers offered higher rebates over the summer on selected models to clear out 1997 stocks. The modest appreciation of the Canadian dollar from levels in early 1995 has also exerted slight downward pressure on consumer prices so far this year.
 
This spring, earlier declines in energy prices at the producer level started to feed through and reverse previous price increases at the consumer level. In particular, the prices of fuel oil and gasoline began to decline, as anticipated in the last issue of the Report. Towards the end of the summer, however, gasoline prices strengthened because of temporary shortages in North America.
 
Aside from developments in energy, world commodity markets have had relatively little net impact on consumer prices since last April. Prices of non-energy commodities (quoted in US dollars) have, on average, remained reasonably firm.
 
At the producer level, the aggregate industrial product price index has increased modestly on a year-over-year basis in recent months. Nonetheless, the 12-month rise in prices of finished industrial goods has edged down.
 
In the last Report, the Bank concluded that some reduction in the highly stimulative monetary conditions would be needed as the economy gained momentum and moved towards full resource utilization. By early summer, however, monetary conditions had eased even further as a result of persistent weakness in the exchange rate. In response to this development, on 26 June the Bank raised the Bank Rate by 25 basis points to 3 per cent and its band for overnight interest rates to between 3 and 3 per cent. This action led to a rise in commercial paper rates and a firming of the dollar, thus reversing the earlier easing in monetary conditions.
 
On 1 October, the Bank raised the Bank Rate by another 25 basis points to 3 per cent and its band for overnight interest rates to between 3 and 3 per cent. This action was taken to moderate the degree of monetary stimulus in the economy given the rapid growth in the measure of money used for transactions and evidence that the economic expansion was becoming more self-sustaining. While money market rates had already largely incorporated this move, the Canadian dollar firmed somewhat further.
 
As a result of the interest rate and exchange rate movements following the 26 June increase in the Bank Rate, the monetary conditions index moved back up to around -5.5. This was close to the average for the first half of 1997, during which time the index fluctuated between approximately -6.0 and -5.0. After the move on 1 October, the index rose somewhat further to between -5.5 and -5.0. At this level, monetary conditions continue to provide strong support for the economy. In late October, however, there was some reversal of the index as a result of currency weakness occurring at the time of the sharp swings in global equity markets.
 
Canadian interest rate premiums continued to decline during the past six months because of the dramatic progress that has been made in eliminating government deficits and growing expectations that inflation will remain low. Medium - and long-term interest rates have fallen further below those in the United States. Moreover, in both countries, interest rate levels at these terms to maturity have declined, with long-term rates in Canada touching record lows. With these declines in market interest rates, comparable mortgage rates in Canada have fallen.
 
The yield curve in Canada nonetheless remains upward sloping. Embodied in the curve are expectations of a rise in short-term money market rates. But gauging the magnitude of these expectations is complicated by the existence of term-to-maturity premiums in interest rates that reflect the uncertainty investors feel about instruments with maturities beyond the shortest terms. In addition, the sharp reduction in the supply of treasury bills, owing to lower Government of Canada borrowing requirements and a shift to longer-term financing, has affected the relationship between yields on treasury bills and those on other money market instruments such as commercial paper.
 
An important factor in the foreign exchange market during the past six months has been the strength of the US dollar. This buoyancy has reflected the strong cyclical position of the US economy compared with those of its major trading partners. The Canadian dollar has benefited from this strength relative to overseas currencies. However, on a trade-weighted basis against all G-10 currencies, the Canadian dollar has declined slightly, with firmness against overseas currencies offset by some weakness vis-à-vis the US dollar. As for the future, market expectations for the Canadian dollar appear to be increasingly based on the view that some combination of a rise in short-term interest rates and in the value of the dollar will occur as the economic cycle matures. It is this expectation of currency appreciation that has enabled short-term interest rates in Canada to remain some 180 basis points below comparable US rates.
 
When evaluating the prospects for inflation, the Bank focusses on the main factors influencing the balance, over the next 12 to 18 months, between the level of aggregate demand and the economy's capacity to supply goods and services. An important element for the outlook will be assessing the net effect on aggregate demand of the degree of monetary stimulus on the one hand and of the diminishing impact of restructuring and fiscal policy measures on the other. The Bank also examines measures of inflation expectations and the pace of monetary expansion.
 
Notwithstanding recent developments in southeast Asia and associated volatility in global equity markets, external factors remain positive for the Canadian economy.
 
In the United States, the pace of economic expansion exceeded the estimated growth of potential output during the first half of 1997. This continued through the third quarter. The rate of increase in real GDP should ease over the next few quarters, as a reduction in pent-up household demand and the possible consequences of the recent stock market decline slow the growth of domestic demand. US inflation, excluding food and energy prices, moderated slightly to 2.2 per cent in September. The good inflation performance to date suggests that the amount of excess demand in the US economy at midyear was probably less than the Bank had previously estimated. Nevertheless, the recent pace of expansion still raises the possibility of an increase in inflation pressures. Although monetary conditions tightened in the first half of the year as a result of the appreciation of the US dollar and the March increase in the federal funds target rate, the Federal Reserve may at some point have to raise interest rates somewhat further in order to head off inflation and thus prolong the economic expansion.
 
Economic expansion in the major European countries was slightly stronger than expected during the first half of 1997. In the second quarter, growth in the major continental economies was supported by strong growth in exports, while in the United Kingdom, activity continued to advance at a faster rate than potential output. Moderate to strong growth is expected in these economies during the second half of the year.
 
In Japan, the economy contracted sharply in the second quarter, more than reversing the spending surge that took place ahead of the April sales tax increase. While easy monetary conditions should provide some support for modest growth of the Japanese economy for the remainder of the year, the recent volatility in southeast Asian financial markets has added a distinct downside risk to the outlook.
 
Commodity prices are expected to firm somewhat. In particular, prices of most industrial commodities should rise as the expansion in the major economies reduces the world's excess capacity.
 
Both external demand and the strong competitive position of Canadian industry should continue to contribute to growth in Canada's exports over the next year. The high level of investment spending in many export-oriented industries should allow exporters to satisfy rising demand as new capacity comes on stream.
 
Domestic demand will continue to be supported by the ongoing effects of low interest rates. Moreover, the restraint on domestic demand from fiscal deficit-reduction measures and the impact on consumer confidence coming from restructuring are diminishing.
 
Thus, several factors point to improved prospects for sustained, strong growth in household demand. The heightened pace of economic expansion has contributed to gains in private sector employment. As both external and domestic fundamentals promote substantial gains in aggregate demand, employment should continue to grow and should lead to increases in personal disposable income. Added to the effects of low interest rates and improved confidence levels, these gains in employment and income as well as pent-up demand for housing and consumer durables, should further boost household demand over the next year. The recent stock market decline is not expected to have any significant effect on activity.
 
Business investment expenditures are also expected to continue growing strongly during the second half of the year. This view is supported by the most recent survey of business confidence by the Conference Board as well as Statistics Canada's mid-year survey of investment intentions.
 
Overall, both external and domestic factors point to vigorous economic activity into 1998. The Bank anticipates average growth of about 4 per cent through to the fourth quarter of 1998. This should translate into annual average growth of a little less than 4 per cent for 1997 and of around 4 per cent for 1998. On a comparable basis, a recent Department of Finance survey shows that private sector forecasters are currently looking for growth of 3.7 per cent in both 1997 and 1998. With this profile, the Bank's current estimate is that the economy may very well be producing at full capacity towards the end of 1998, although there remains considerable uncertainty regarding such estimates. Until then, slack in goods and labour markets will continue to put downward pressure on inflation.
 
Strengthening household demand may further reduce the degree of price discounting in the Canadian retail marketplace as some retailers attempt to improve profitability. Earlier marked declines in the prices of many industrial materials are, however, still working their way through the system and should continue to put slight downward pressure on the CPI in coming months. On balance, these factors should have little net effect on the core CPI through 1998.
 
Expectations of inflation, as noted earlier in Technical Box 2, are influenced both by recent developments in inflation and by the credibility of the Bank's inflation-control strategy. In the regular survey reported in the Conference Board's September Index of Business Confidence, 84 per cent of respondents (compared with 78 per cent in the March 1997 survey) expected inflation to be 2 per cent or less over the near term.
 
In the Conference Board's September quarterly Survey of Forecasters, it was anticipated that CPI inflation would average about 1.8 per cent in 1997 and 1.9 per cent in 1998. The 1997 forecast was marginally lower than that of six months earlier, while the 1998 forecast was unchanged. Longer-term inflation forecasts, as reported by Consensus Economics Inc., are also in the lower part of the inflation-control target range.
 
With the decline in the nominal long-term interest rate, the differential between the yields on conventional and Real Return Bonds has narrowed further, extending a three-year downward trend. This would suggest that investors have continued to adapt to the low-inflation environment. The decline in this differential so far this year is similar to that in other industrial countries that issue index-linked bonds. While one cannot extract a precise estimate of expected inflation from this differential, it would appear that expectations are within the inflation-control target range.
 
M1 (the definition of money that includes the money used in transactions) grew at an unsustainably rapid pace over the first half of 1997, reflecting low interest rates and the lingering effects of the introduction of competitive interest rates on current accounts. More recently, M1 growth on a year-over-year basis has started to moderate towards a pace more consistent with inflation remaining within the target range.
 
The rapid growth of real M1 over the past year indicates that the robust expansion of real GDP should continue into next year. The yield curve also suggests that economic growth should be strong in 1998. A steep yield curve has usually been followed by strong GDP growth over the next four quarters. Taken together, these indicators are consistent with real GDP growing faster than estimated potential through 1998.
 
M2+ ( the traditional broad definition of money, which includes money market mutual funds) has been growing very slowly on a year-over-year basis since the last Report. Normally, this would indicate the absence of inflationary pressure. In recent years, however, holders of deposits have been seeking higher yields by switching into mutual funds, most of which are outside the M2+ aggregate. The adjusted M2+ aggregate incorporates mutual funds sponsored by financial institutions that issue deposits or deposit-like instruments, in order to capture the shifts within those institutions from deposits to mutual funds. However, investors have also been shifting from deposits to mutual funds other than those sponsored by such institutions. M2++ is an alternative measure that incorporates all mutual funds. Over the past 12 months, M2+ has increased by 0.2 per cent, adjusted M2+ by 3.1 per cent, and M2++ by 7.9 per cent. Such disparate outcomes make it difficult, at present, to draw inferences about inflation from the growth of these traditional and adjusted broad monetary aggregates. Research is continuing into measures of broad money that might have a more reliable link with future inflation.
 
In summary, three factors lead us to expect core inflation to remain in the lower half of the inflation-control target range well into 1998. First, downward pressure on core inflation arising from slack in both product and labour markets will continue to play a role over this period. Second, strong growth in productivity in the context of robust economic expansion will contribute to keeping overall unit cost increases low. Third, inflation expectations, based on the various measures available, appear to be centred slightly below the midpoint of the target range.
 
Once the Canadian economy reaches full capacity, however, inflation pressures could mount unless the Bank is successful in ensuring that the upward trend of aggregate demand is consistent with the growth of the economy's potential to produce.
 
Inflation, measured by either the core CPI or the total CPI, is expected to stay in the lower half of the inflation-control target range between now and the next Report.
 
Over the period to the end of 1998, the economy is projected to expand at an annual rate of about 4 per cent. Since this pace exceeds the estimated growth of potential output for this period, the Bank's current expectation is that the output gap will tend to close towards the end of 1998.
 
Under these circumstances, the challenge for monetary policy will be to set monetary conditions at levels that encourage a pace of economic expansion that achieves full use of the economy's capacity and at the same time preserves low inflation. This is how monetary policy can contribute to continued, sustainable gains in output and employment. To this end, some moderation in the degree of monetary stimulus will be needed over the medium term.
 
While the strategic direction of policy is thus clear, taking measured steps in that direction raises three issues: the timing of policy actions; the amount of adjustment to monetary conditions required; and the extent to which stimulus will be reduced as a result of movements in short-term interest rates as opposed to a strengthening of the Canadian dollar.
 
Given recent economic trends, and apart from any complications that might arise from a more prolonged bout of the financial market volatility experienced in late October, it seems likely that further action to reduce monetary stimulus will be required between now and the next Report. In these circumstances, it also seems likely that somewhat higher short-term interest rates and a firmer exchange rate will both contribute to less-stimulative monetary conditions. However, with low inflation and improved fiscal positions, increases in interest rates and in overall monetary conditions should be much smaller than in past periods of high inflation.
 
During the next six months, the Bank will have to closely monitor the momentum of the economy and developments in financial markets in order to assess the pace and extent of adjustments to monetary conditions necessary to preserve low inflation and thus bring about a long-lasting economic expansion. It is by prolonging the expansion that we will achieve sustained reductions in unemployment in Canada.