Global financial conditions have eased further in recent months, as many central banks have added to monetary policy stimulus in response to persistent economic slack and below-target inflation. The effects of lower prices for oil and other commodities are working their way through the world economy, boosting overall global growth, but weakening growth prospects in some countries. All things considered, the Bank expects global economic growth to strengthen and average about 3 1/2 per cent over the 2015-17 period, in line with the January Monetary Policy Report.
 
In this global context, the economic prospects of major economies continue to diverge. As the US economy strengthens, the Federal Reserve is widely expected to start normalizing monetary policy later this year - in contrast to the ongoing easing in other advanced economies. The substantial strengthening of the US dollar against most other currencies, notably the euro, the yen and the Canadian dollar, largely reflects such differences and, over time, will contribute to mitigating them by boosting net exports in the weaker economies.
 
The sharp drop in oil prices as well as lower commodity food prices have been key common factors behind weak total CPI inflation globally. Although the disinflationary effects of lower oil and food prices are generally expected to be transitory, core inflation in many countries has been well below inflation targets for an extended period. Persistent excess global supply has been a steady source of downward pressure on underlying inflation in the advanced economies. Labour gaps also remain large. While some countries have achieved significant reductions in headline unemployment rates, in many advanced economies, high rates of long-term unemployment and modest wage growth suggest that labour market slack remains.
 
In response to this persistent economic slack and low inflation, as well as the weakening growth prospects of some commodity producers, more than 25 central banks of advanced and emerging-market economies, representing over half of world GDP, have lowered their policy rates further or introduced additional unconventional easing measures since the start of 2015. Notably, the European Central Bank announced a quantitative easing program in January and began asset purchases in early March. As well, policy deposit rates are negative in the euro area and in several other European countries.
 
Yields on long-term bonds have reached historical lows across most advanced economies, reflecting both market expectations for low short-term interest rates in the future and compressed term premiums. In particular, the asset purchase programs implemented by the ECB and the Bank of Japan have lowered term premiums, with spillover effects into yields in other countries. In many euro-area countries, long-term bond yields have fallen sharply, in some cases even showing negative rates on terms beyond five years. At the same time, the gap between lending rates in the core and peripheral countries has narrowed, with the exception of Greece.
 
The additional policy easing in many countries in recent months has boosted stock market indexes globally, particularly in Europe, and many indexes remain at or near record highs. Credit spreads for both investment-grade and high-yield issuers have contracted further.
 
Uneven growth prospects across regions and expectations of diverging monetary policy paths have been reflected in higher levels of financial market volatility, particularly in fixed-income and foreign exchange markets. An increase in volatility toward more normal levels is to be expected with the re-emergence of two-way risk in policy rates. Some central banks have lowered rates to negative values - below what was previously viewed as a lower bound. In other countries, such as the United States and the United Kingdom, market prices reflect expectations of rising policy rates. These same forces have also contributed to the further appreciation of the US dollar against other currencies, including the Canadian dollar.
 
Since January, the Canadian dollar has depreciated against the US dollar, largely reflecting the broad strength of the US dollar and the expected divergence in the paths for monetary policy in the two countries. The current level of the Canadian dollar is also consistent with the dollar's historical relationship with oil prices. By convention, the Canadian dollar is assumed to be close to its recent average level of 79 cents over the projection horizon, compared with the 86 cents assumed in January.
 
Following their sharp slide in the second half of 2014, the benchmark oil prices that are relevant for the Canadian economy have been quite volatile, fluctuating at or below levels assumed in the January Report. Prices for West Texas Intermediate and Western Canada Select - the main pricing benchmarks for Western Canadian producers - continue to be influenced by rising US oil production, even as refinery maintenance and strikes have curbed demand.
 
In response to low prices, many oil producers, particularly those with higher-cost projects in US shale and the Canadian oil sands, have announced steep cuts to their capital expenditure budgets, and drilling activity has fallen sharply. Consequently, estimates of oil supply growth over the next three years have been revised down among producers who are not members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries.
 
By convention, the Bank assumes that energy prices will remain near their recent levels over the projection horizon. The US-dollar prices for Brent, WTI and WCS have averaged roughly $55, $50 and $35 per barrel, respectively, since early March. Relative to assumptions in the January Report, these prices are $5 weaker for all three benchmarks.
 
Over the remainder of 2015, there continue to be important downside risks to oil prices, since it will take time for cuts in investment to be reflected in reduced production. With continued overproduction, oil inventories have been accumulating rapidly, particularly in the United States. The "contango" in oil futures markets (i.e., when futures prices are above spot prices) is encouraging the accumulation of inventories. As long as this price spread exceeds storage costs, oil market participants can buy relatively cheap oil today and sell it forward for future delivery, locking in risk-free profits. In a situation such as the current one, where supply is still adjusting to lower prices, such storage behaviour tends to stabilize market prices by removing oil from the market when it is relatively abundant and making it available at a later date, when it may be scarcer. There is a risk, however, that the available storage capacity will be filled up before production is brought back into line with demand growth, triggering a further drop in prices.
 
Over the medium term, there are both upside and downside risks to the price of oil. Overall, the Bank judges that these risks are tilted to the upside. The upside risks continue to be supply driven. Without a sufficient increase in OPEC production capacity, higher-cost, non-OPEC unconventional supply will be needed to meet rising global demand. Persistently low investment in new oil projects could significantly reduce future growth in oil supplies, leading to higher prices. This upward pressure will be partly mitigated by cost-cutting initiatives, which, together with ongoing technological advances, are helping to lower the cost of producing oil. Geopolitical tensions and supply disruptions may also lead to lower-than-expected growth of supply.
 
On the downside, competition among major producers and reduced demand as a result of energy efficiency and regulation could put downward pressure on oil prices. As well, depending on the outcome of negotiations with Iran currently scheduled to conclude in June, additional Iranian oil supplies could return to the market.
 
Prices are expected to remain volatile as the structure of the oil market continues to evolve-particularly since OPEC producers are less able to play their customary role as the "swing producer" in stabilizing prices. In this context, market supply will adjust mainly through the uncoordinated production decisions of higher-cost producers such as shale producers. Such actions are not likely to rebalance the market as quickly as in periods when OPEC has taken coordinated action to stabilize prices.
 
Commodity prices are being held down by commodity-specific  supply factors in the context of the weak growth of global demand over the past few years. The Bank's indexes of energy and non-energy commodity prices are both below their historical averages in real terms.
 
Despite robust demand triggered by the cold weather this winter, natural gas prices have fallen sharply since November, reflecting very strong US production. Meanwhile, non-energy commodity prices have also continued to move down. Agricultural commodity prices are near their lowest levels in five years, owing to good harvests for grains in recent years and improving supply prospects for livestock. Hog prices are declining as producers rebuild their herds in response to record-high prices last summer. Lumber prices have also fallen, since extremely cold weather impeded North American construction activity in early 2015. The ongoing correction in the Chinese housing market, meanwhile, is putting persistent downward pressure on the prices of base metals. The global spot price for iron ore has declined by 50 per cent over the past year, as low-cost production capacity has been brought online in Australia and Brazil, despite the slowdown in demand growth.
 
The Bank's non-energy commodity price index has fallen by 5 per cent since the January Report and is expected to continue to decline over the first half of 2015, before rising modestly over the remainder of the projection period as the global economy strengthens.
 
Both low oil prices and accommodative monetary policy are providing support for the global economy. The economic prospects of the major economies continue to diverge, however, as the benefits of low oil prices vary across regions, and headwinds linger in many economies.
 
In the United States, despite a weak start to 2015, real GDP growth is expected to strengthen and to become increasingly self-sustaining, led by strong private domestic demand. Economic activity in the first quarter of 2015 was negatively affected by several transitory factors, including severe winter weather and disruptions caused by the West Coast port strike. Much of this activity is expected to be recovered over the coming months, however, as suggested by other indicators, such as employment growth and confidence. Together with low oil prices, an improving labour market should contribute to solid growth in real disposable income and household spending.
 
A sustained expansion in US residential investment - a key market for Canada's exports - has been slow to materialize. However, with robust growth in labour income, low mortgage rates and signs that household formation is improving, new housing construction is still expected to post strong growth later this year. A pickup in household demand and ongoing improvements in confidence, combined with healthy firm balance sheets, should further stimulate business investment.
 
The appreciation of the US dollar, which reflects this relatively positive economic outlook, is nevertheless expected to be a drag on US growth.
 
Headwinds to growth have been slower to dissipate in other oil-importing advanced economies. In the euro area, economic activity is projected to be stronger than in recent years in light of low oil prices and the announcement and implementation of quantitative easing. The recovery is nevertheless expected to remain modest and uneven across the region, since the need for private deleveraging remains high and labour market conditions continue to be difficult in some economies. In Japan, growth is expected to increase over the projection horizon, but weak increases in real wages and low confidence are hindering progress toward achieving the country's policy objectives. In contrast, growth has been picking up more strongly in the United Kingdom, in part reflecting greater progress in deleveraging and balance-sheet repair following the global financial crisis.
 
In China, a correction in the property market and weaker investment, brought about in part by actions by the authorities to rebalance the economy, have led to a slowdown in activity. In response, policy support has been introduced. Economic growth in 2015 is now expected to come in around the authorities' target of about 7 per cent. Solid growth is anticipated in other parts of emerging Asia, notably India, contributing to a pickup in global growth in 2016.
 
Low commodity prices have dampened the growth prospects of many emerging-market commodity exporters, who are facing declines in their terms of trade, government revenues, investment and confidence. In some cases, geopolitical uncertainty is exacerbating these negative effects.
 
The appreciation of the US dollar against most other major currencies is helping to mitigate differences in growth prospects by strengthening the export competitiveness of slower-growing regions. Notably, the euro, the yen and the currencies of many commodity-exporting  countries have depreciated against the US dollar. These exchange rate adjustments have led to a weaker growth outlook for the US economy in 2015 than anticipated in the January Report, through a drag from net trade. The gains in net trade resulting from the depreciation of the euro and the yen should provide some offset to the lingering headwinds in these regions.
 
Overall, while the regional composition of growth has shifted somewhat, the Bank continues to expect global growth to average about 3 1/2 per cent over the projection horizon, in line with the January Report.
 
Core inflation has remained close to 2 per cent in recent months, while total CPI inflation has slowed to 1 per cent, reflecting the fall in gasoline prices. Core inflation has been boosted by the pass-through effects of the lower Canadian dollar and some sector-specific factors that have been offsetting the disinflationary pressures from economic slack.
 
The broad implications of the decline in oil prices for the Canadian economy remain as described in the January Report, although the negative effects appear to be even more front-loaded. The negative impact on income and wealth associated with the fall in the terms of trade is already reducing household spending. At the same time, investment plans in the oil and gas sector are being sharply curtailed. The Bank now expects that the Canadian economy stalled in the first quarter of 2015, leading to a widening in the degree of excess capacity and additional downward pressure on inflation.
 
Beyond the energy sector, the natural sequence of stronger exports, increased investment and improved employment opportunities is progressing, even though the temporary weakening in the US economy early in the year has slowed this process. Looking ahead, this sequence will be bolstered by strengthening US demand and by the considerable easing in financial conditions that has occurred, resulting in part from the January cut to the target for the overnight rate. As the impact of the oil price shock on growth starts to dissipate, this natural sequence is expected to re-emerge as the dominant trend around mid-year.
 
On an average annual basis, real GDP is expected to grow by 1.9 per cent in 2015 and 2.5 per cent in 2016, roughly the same as anticipated in January. However, the composition of growth will be somewhat different, with stronger exports and a smaller pickup in investment. In 2017, real GDP is expected to grow by 2.0 per cent.
 
Based on the assumption that Brent will be priced at US$55 per barrel, total CPI inflation is expected to ease to slightly below 1 per cent in the coming months before rising to the 2 per cent target early in 2016. Core inflation is anticipated to remain near 2 per cent over the projection horizon, as the upward pressure from past exchange rate depreciation offsets the ongoing downward pressure from excess supply, which will gradually diminish as the output gap closes. The Bank continues to expect that core and total CPI inflation will be at 2 per cent on a sustainable basis around the end of 2016 as the economy reaches full capacity.
 
Core inflation, as measured by CPIX, has been relatively stable at about 2 per cent in recent months, since the temporary effects of sector-specific factors (mainly meat and communications prices) and the pass-through effects of the depreciation of the Canadian dollar have offset the disinflationary forces from slack in the economy and heightened competition in the retail sector.
 
The temporary boost to core inflation from sector-specific factors has begun to dissipate and is now estimated to be 0.2 percentage points. The disinflationary effect of heightened competition in the retail sector continues to wane and is currently estimated to lower core inflation by only 0.1 percentage point.
 
The Bank estimates that the impact of the pass-through from exchange rate depreciation is currently boosting core inflation by about 0.3 to 0.4 percentage points. A comparison of price developments in Canada with those in the United States supports this assessment. The estimated pass-through is higher than was estimated in January, as the effects of the additional depreciation of the Canadian dollar since then are starting to materialize.
 
As always, the Bank monitors a wide range of measures to assess underlying inflation. However, none of the measures of core inflation, including CPIX, can perfectly capture underlying inflation at any given time. For example, all of the alternative measures of core inflation are currently being boosted to varying degrees by exchange rate pass-through. The Bank's analysis indicates that, without this pass-through, these measures of inflation would range from about 1.6 per cent to 1.8 per cent. Taking these measures into account, together with other indicators of economic slack, the Bank's view is that underlying inflation is still below 2 per cent. Thus, if the output gap failed to close as projected by the Bank, inflation would drift down below 2 per cent.
 
Total CPI inflation slowed to 1 per cent, reflecting a steep decline in year-over-year gasoline prices. This drop in total CPI inflation was smaller than expected at the time of the January Report, largely owing to the further depreciation of the Canadian dollar against the US dollar.
 
The negative effects of lower oil prices have begun to emerge and seem to be more front-loaded than expected in January. Not surprisingly, there is considerable dispersion in the regional impacts of these developments, with areas that have a larger energy-production footprint more adversely affected.
 
The decline in commodity prices is having a large effect on income, with Canada's real gross domestic income decreasing by 0.7 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2014. Canada's terms of trade declined by about 8 per cent in the fourth quarter and are estimated to have continued to deteriorate in the first quarter of 2015. A number of signals suggest that the reduction in domestic incomes, profits and wealth associated with this deterioration is already affecting household spending. While there are other factors contributing to near-term weakness, the volume of retail sales declined markedly in December and January. In addition, residential investment slowed in the fourth quarter of 2014 and is estimated to have fallen off significantly in the first quarter of 2015.
 
After picking up in the middle of last year, business investment declined in the fourth quarter. The drop in oil prices is expected to lead to a rapid contraction in investment in the oil and gas sector. Steep cuts to capital expenditures in the oil industry have been announced, and rigging activity has decreased precipitously since the beginning of the year.
 
The Bank's estimate of real GDP in the first quarter of 2015 has been revised down since the January Report, to essentially no growth, primarily reflecting the pulling forward of the impact of the oil price shock. Other factors at play included harsh winter weather and temporary weakness in US economic activity.
 
The Bank monitors a wide array of indicators to assess the degree of capacity pressures in the Canadian economy. Two of the most important indicators point to an increase in excess capacity in the first quarter: the Bank's statistical measure of the output gap is estimated to be about -1/2 per cent, while the structural measure, which has been updated to reflect our reassessment of potential output growth , suggests excess capacity of 1 1/2 per cent in the first quarter.  In contrast, the spring Business Outlook Survey suggests that many firms continue to operate close to capacity.
 
Meanwhile, labour market conditions appear to have improved modestly, on balance, over the past six months. For example, the unemployment, underutilization and long-term unemployment rates have all eased, while prime-age labour force participation has begun to recover in recent months following weakness in the middle of 2014. Despite these encouraging developments, a material degree of slack persists in the labour market, as illustrated by the Bank's labour market indicator. Moreover, the full impact of the decline in oil prices has yet to show up in employment statistics. The balance of opinion on hiring intentions in the Business Outlook Survey fell to its lowest level since 2009, and firms reported that labour shortages remain low and are less intense than 12 months ago.
 
Measures of the utilization of existing capital stock continue to indicate less excess capacity than do measures of labour market slack, consistent with the pattern expected following a destructive recession. Total industrial capacity utilization has risen above its historical average, to 83.6 per cent. Capacity utilization in many non-energy industries has also increased in recent quarters, a precursor to greater investment spending. The most recent Business Outlook Survey indicates that capacity pressures were more prevalent among export-oriented firms, which frequently cited physical capacity constraints as a key obstacle to meeting a sudden rise in demand.
 
Taking into account the various indicators of capacity pressures, the Bank judges that there is material slack in the Canadian economy. The amount of excess capacity in the first quarter is estimated to be between 1/2 and 1 1/2 per cent, suggesting more slack and disinflationary pressures than estimated in January.
 
The easing of financial conditions since January will provide additional support to growth over the projection horizon. The yield curve on government bonds has shifted down, reflecting the January reduction in the target for the overnight rate as well as developments in global financial markets. In turn, lower government bond yields have fed through to household and business borrowing rates, which have declined to historical lows.
 
The balance of opinion on credit conditions in the Bank's Business Outlook Survey points to an easing over the past three months. Overall, most businesses continue to characterize credit as easy or relatively easy to obtain. The Bank's Senior Loan Officer Survey for the first quarter of 2015 suggests broadly unchanged overall business-lending conditions. However, both surveys noted some tightening for firms tied to commodity-related production.
 
Easier credit conditions, together with the 8 per cent decline in the value of the Canadian dollar relative to the assumption in the January Report, will help to mitigate the negative effects of the decline in oil prices. They will facilitate the sectoral adjustment needed to strengthen investment, improve firms' cash flows and provide support to household spending.
 
After stalling in the first quarter, real GDP growth is expected to rebound in the second quarter and subsequently strengthen to average about 2 1/2 per cent on a quarterly basis until the middle of 2016. The Bank expects that the economy will reach full capacity around the end of 2016. In 2017, growth will average about 2 per cent. Given the degree of uncertainty in economic projections, the Bank judges that real GDP growth is likely to be within ±0.5 percentage points of the base-case projection in 2015, with a somewhat wider range in 2016 and 2017.
 
The stronger growth profile for GDP that emerges in mid-2015 occurs as the negative effects of lower oil prices on investment growth in the energy sector start to dissipate and activity in the non-energy sector gains further traction. In the base-case projection, the low oil price assumption leads to a persistent shift of investment and jobs away from energy-related sectors and regions, reversing some of the earlier structural adjustment in the Canadian economy.
 
The timing and composition of growth have shifted somewhat relative to the outlook in the January Report. As already discussed, the negative impact of the decline in oil prices is appearing earlier than previously anticipated but, over the projection horizon, the total drag associated with the decline is estimated to be about the same. Although the weaker value of the Canadian dollar will provide an additional boost to exports, by increasing the cost of imported capital, the lower dollar will weigh on investment spending. Taking into account these factors as well as recent indicators and analysis, the Bank has revised down its profile for business investment.
 
The government spending assumptions contained in the base case provide a small positive contribution to growth over the projection horizon and reflect already announced fiscal measures, as is the Bank's convention.
 
The anticipated rotation of demand toward non-energy exports is well under way. After two years of weak growth, the pickup in NEX finally materialized in 2014. The product categories expected to lead the NEX recovery, most of which are sensitive to the exchange rate, grew at their fastest pace since 2000 and have maintained some momentum in the early months of 2015. Some of the major contributors to this recent surge include aircraft and parts, industrial and electrical machinery and equipment, pharmaceutical products, building and packaging materials, and metal products. In addition, exports of services continued to post positive growth in 2014. The pickup in the manufacturing sector, which accounts for 70 per cent of NEX, will generate positive spillovers to other sectors, such as transportation and warehousing; wholesale trade; and finance, insurance, real estate and leasing.
 
The recovery in NEX is expected to become more firmly entrenched as the US economy strengthens. In addition, the depreciation of the Canadian dollar, combined with stronger labour productivity growth in Canada than in the United States over the past two years, has led to a meaningful improvement in Canada's competitiveness. Nevertheless, the projected profile of NEX growth is based on prudent assumptions, taking into account the lost capacity and underperformance in this sector over the past decade.
 
Growth in total business investment is expected to decline significantly in the first half of 2015, reflecting a sizable pullback in the oil and gas sector, before slowly recovering in the second half of the year and gaining momentum in 2016.
 
The aggregate data for business investment are masking divergent developments in the energy and non-energy sectors. The Bank expects investment in the oil and gas sector to fall by about 30 per cent in 2015. In contrast, growth in business investment outside of the oil and gas sector is expected to pick up as non-energy exports grow, remaining excess capacity in these industries is absorbed, and businesses become increasingly confident about the economic outlook. Recent improvements in financing costs and conditions should further support business investment. However, there is considerable uncertainty about how quickly business investment will respond to these favourable drivers.
 
In the Bank's base-case projection, investment outside of the oil and gas sector is expected to increase by about 7 per cent per year, on average. This profile is lower than was expected in January, reflecting weaker momentum at the end of 2014, as well as further evidence from the spring Business Outlook Survey that showed a second quarterly decline in the balance of opinion on investment intentions. In addition, the weaker dollar has raised the cost of imported machinery and equipment.
 
Household expenditures are expected to grow at a moderate pace over the projection horizon. The loss of wealth and income associated with the rapid decline in Canada's terms of trade will restrain spending growth, although easier financial conditions will provide some offset. The money that consumers are saving at the gas pump could also help to mitigate the negative income effects, although the extent to which this windfall will be spent or used to pay down debt is not clear.
 
In recent months, there have been signs of moderation in the national housing market. Housing starts and resale activity have slowed since last autumn alongside harsh weather conditions in early 2015. Additionally, a more balanced sales-to-listings ratio has been accompanied by slower growth in house prices. However, housing market conditions continue to diverge across regions. To date, the impacts on housing activity from falling energy prices appear to be largely restricted to Canada's energy-producing regions. The previously robust markets of Calgary and Edmonton have seen steep declines in resale activity and a significant slowdown in the year-over-year growth of house prices in recent months. At the same time, resale activity has remained strong in British Columbia and Ontario, particularly in Vancouver and Toronto, where house price growth is still elevated.
 
Over the projection horizon, residential investment as a share of GDP is expected to edge down. Despite localized risks, the most likely scenario as the economy gains strength remains a soft landing in the national housing market and a stabilization of debt-to-income  ratios.
 
The January cut in the target for the overnight rate should help to mitigate financial pressures in the household sector by cushioning the decline in income and employment caused by lower oil prices. It also reduces the likelihood of a more adverse scenario that could cause stress in the financial system.
 
Core inflation is expected to remain near 2 per cent throughout the projection period. In the near term, the widening of the output gap is expected to exert additional downward pressure on inflation. Based on the assumption that the Canadian dollar stays around 79 cents, the pass-through effects are expected to peak in the second half of 2015 and to dissipate by the end of 2016. Meanwhile, as economic growth picks up and the output gap narrows, the disinflationary pressures from excess supply are expected to gradually diminish. The effects on core inflation of the lower dollar and the narrowing output gap roughly offset each other over the projection horizon.
 
With a Brent price of US$55, total CPI inflation is expected to fall slightly below 1 per cent in the coming months, reflecting steep year-over-year declines in gasoline prices, before returning to 2 per cent early in 2016. Given the volatility in oil prices, there remains a high level of uncertainty about the profile for total CPI inflation. For example, if the base-case scenario assumed that oil prices were 10 per cent higher , total CPI inflation would be higher by about 0.3 percentage points over the coming year.
 
As the economy reaches and remains at full capacity around the end of 2016 and with well-anchored inflation expectations, both total and core inflation are projected to be close to 2 per cent on a sustained basis.
 
While short-term expectations for total CPI inflation remain near the lower end of the control range, medium-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored at 2 per cent. The March Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation for 2015 is 0.9 per cent, down slightly from January, while the forecast for 2016 has remained unchanged, at 2.1 per cent. Results from the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey show that the majority of firms anticipate that, over the next two years, total CPI inflation will be in the bottom half of the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range. This is consistent with low total CPI inflation in 2015, reflecting the downward pressures coming from gasoline prices.
 
Based on the past dispersion of private sector forecasts, a reasonable range around the base-case projection for total CPI inflation is ±0.3 percentage points. This range is intended to convey a sense of forecast uncertainty. Fan charts, which are derived using statistical analysis of the Bank's forecast errors, provide a complementary perspective.
 
The outlook for inflation is subject to several risks emanating from both the external environment and the domestic economy. The Bank judges that the risks to the projected path for inflation are roughly balanced.
 
The most important risks to inflation are the following:
 
Considerable uncertainty remains around the future path for oil prices. Indeed, the Bank believes that there are still downside risks to oil prices in the near term, while over the medium term, risks are tilted to the upside. At present, however, a more important risk relates to the effect of the oil price shock on the Canadian economy. Real GDP appears to have stalled in the first quarter, a weaker outcome than anticipated in January. While the Bank believes that this additional weakness primarily reflects a pulling forward of the adverse impact of the oil price shock, there is a risk that the negative impact of the shock is larger than estimated. For example, there could be a larger pullback in investment in the oil and gas sector than currently anticipated. In addition, the Bank judges that part of the weakness in consumption in the first quarter was related to temporary factors. If a greater portion was instead attributable to the decline in oil prices, household spending could take longer to recover. If this risk were to materialize, disinflationary pressures would be more persistent than currently anticipated.
 
At the national level, a soft landing in the housing sector continues to be the most likely scenario, with residential investment as a share of GDP expected to edge down over the projection horizon. Nevertheless, elevated house prices and debt levels relative to income continue to leave households vulnerable. The adverse impact of the oil price shock in Alberta and continued robust price growth in Toronto and Vancouver suggest a risk of a correction in these markets. While historical experience suggests that localized Canadian house price cycles, both in terms of the factors behind the boom as well as the correction, have typically not spilled over to other regions, it would be a major event if it occurred. If corrections in several important local markets materialized simultaneously, the spillover effects to the rest of the economy could be significant. In addition, while the precise magnitude is highly uncertain, the adverse impact of lower oil prices on household income is likely to contribute to a further increase in debt-to-income ratios. A disorderly unwinding of these imbalances, should it materialize, could have sizable negative effects on other parts of the economy and on inflation.
 
Stronger-than-expected private demand in the United States is the most important upside risk to inflation in Canada. Consumption growth in the United States has been robust, despite modest wage growth over the recent past. Steady employment gains and improving labour market fundamentals - such as falling levels of long-term unemployment and of involuntary part-time workers - suggest that wage growth could strengthen more quickly than anticipated as labour market slack is taken up. Higher wage growth, together with the boost from lower oil prices, could trigger even faster consumption growth. Businesses would increase hiring and investment by more than expected, further supporting household spending and economic activity more generally. Stronger US activity would generate positive spillovers to growth in the rest of the world, and in particular to demand for Canadian non-energy exports and to Canadian business investment.