Global economic growth continues to strengthen and broaden across countries. The US economy remains robust, while growth has also firmed in other advanced economies and in many emerging-market economies. The global growth profile is modestly above that in the October Monetary Policy Report, averaging about 3 1/2 per cent over 2017-19. The outlook for advanced economies is stronger than in October: economic growth for the United States, in particular, has been revised up, reflecting stronger momentum and recent tax reform legislation. Meanwhile, although inflation in advanced economies remains below target, it is expected to rise.
 
The outlook remains subject to considerable uncertainty, mainly around geopolitical developments and trade policy. For Canada and Mexico, the estimated drag on investment and trade associated with trade-policy uncertainty has been increased relative to October, reflecting greater uncertainty around renegotiations of the North American Free Trade Agreement. However, the Bank's base-case scenario is predicated on existing trade arrangements over the projection horizon.
 
The US economy is projected to grow at a solid pace The US economy has been expanding at a robust pace. Third-quarter growth was higher than expected, mainly reflecting stronger net exports. Recent monthly data, such as on household consumption and housing starts, also indicate greater momentum. While wage growth remains modest, the labour market has continued to improve. The unemployment rate has been falling, the prime-age participation rate has been rising and recent job gains have been strong - the average number of new jobs per month over the past six months is now about 165,000. Indicators of business and consumer confidence have also remained elevated.
 
The projection includes recently legislated tax reforms. The Bank assumes that reductions in personal and corporate taxes will accumulate to roughly US$600 billion by the end of 2019. The boost to household disposable income from reduced personal taxes is expected to stimulate household expenditures. However, this effect will likely be relatively modest since the distribution of tax cuts favours high-income individuals who tend to spend a smaller share of any tax savings. The reduction in the federal corporate tax rate, combined with more generous tax treatment of capital expenditures, should prompt additional capital spending by firms. Taken together, these tax reforms are expected to boost the level of gross domestic product by 0.5 per cent in 2019.
 
Overall, growth is projected to average about 2 1/2 per cent over the 2017-19 period, an increase from the October Report based on both greater-than-expected momentum and the tax reform legislation. The underlying dynamics of the economic outlook remain largely unchanged. Consumption is expected to expand at a healthy pace, based on robust fundamentals, including a strong labour market. Business investment should be supported by the projected solid pace of expansion of private demand as well as the tax changes. Net exports, in contrast, are likely to weigh on growth.
 
The base-case projection is subject to considerable uncertainty. Importantly, growth could be weaker if materially more protectionist trade policies are implemented.
 
Growth in the euro area has been stronger than expected and continues to be broad-based across countries in the region. Recent data, notably improving labour market indicators and elevated indicators of economic sentiment, suggest greater momentum.
 
In Japan, third-quarter growth was stronger than anticipated. Measures of business and economic conditions have been rising, indicating stronger growth prospects than previously assessed.
 
Based on these developments, the growth outlook for the euro area and Japan has been revised up. The pace of expansion in both economies is still expected to moderate over the projection horizon.
 
Inflation in advanced economies has shown some upward movement. Core inflation has ticked up modestly in some jurisdictions, although it has been at low levels in most countries, mainly reflecting past labour market slack. Inflation in US core personal consumption expenditures has picked up, mostly due to higher prices for services, notably financial and telecommunication services.
 
Wage inflation and price inflation in advanced economies are expected to edge up gradually as growth remains above potential and capacity pressures build. This rise is also consistent with market expectations for inflation, which appear to have stabilized and, in some cases, started to drift up after being on a gradual downward trend through the first half of 2017.
 
Economic activity in China is evolving largely as anticipated. Growth is projected to moderate from about 6 3/4 per cent in 2017 to about 6 1/4 per cent in 2019, as the economy rebalances toward a more sustainable and higher quality growth path. This profile is consistent with the Chinese administration's emphasis on structural reforms, on protecting the environment and on addressing financial sector vulnerabilities.
 
In other oil-importing EMEs, growth is projected to average about 4 1/4 per cent over 2017-19. Strength is particularly evident in emerging Asia, where, in some countries, there has been notable progress on growth enhancing reforms. The growth profile has been revised up over 2017-18 based on recent widespread strength in economic activity in much of emerging Asia and emerging Europe. In contrast, the pickup in growth in the "rest of the world" grouping over 2017-19 is projected to be more modest than previously expected. The adjustment of EME oil exporters to lower oil prices has been more protracted than anticipated, and the related fiscal consolidation is expected to exert a larger drag on growth.
 
Global financial conditions remain accommodative amid strengthening global growth, progress on US tax reforms and generally low inflation. Yields on long-term sovereign bonds have edged up while equity markets have been strong, notably in the United States. At the same time, monetary policy in some major jurisdictions has been putting upward pressure on short-term yields since October. The Federal Reserve has continued to gradually normalize monetary policy, and markets expect several further increases in the federal funds rate in 2018 and beyond. The Bank of England also raised its policy rate in November. As a result of this combination of rising short-term rates and comparatively stable long-term yields, yield curves globally are somewhat flatter.
 
Benchmark prices for global crude oil have recently averaged about 20 per cent higher than assumed in October, driven mainly by supply-side factors. Prices have been supported by political tensions in parts of the Middle East as well as pipeline outages, particularly in Libya and the North Sea. With slowing growth in the productivity of newly drilled shale wells, diminished expectations for US shale oil production also likely supported prices. In addition, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and some other oil producers extended the agreement to maintain their lower levels of production in November.
 
Meanwhile, the spread between the prices of West Texas Intermediate and Western Canada Select has widened sharply. Transportation constraints faced by Canadian producers have held down the price of WCS, leaving it just below October levels, while the price of WTI has continued to climb.
 
By convention, the Bank assumes that oil prices will remain near their recent levels. Prices around these levels appear consistent with continued demand-supply adjustment in the global oil market. Risks to global oil prices are tilted to the downside over 2018: US oil production has been increasing steadily, and a recent uptick in drilling activity for US shale oil suggests that production could be even stronger. Meanwhile, if transportation issues are resolved, the price of WCS could move closer to that of WTI.
 
The Bank's non-energy commodity price index is broadly unchanged relative to that in October. Despite recent volatility, base metal prices are back near October levels, with one exception in the sharp rise in iron ore spot prices. Lumber prices have risen modestly, supported by strong demand associated with higher single-family housing starts in the United States. Agriculture prices are little changed.
 

The Canadian economy grew strongly in 2017, and the level of economic activity is now close to capacity. Growth is expected to average about 2.5 per cent in the near term and then slow to close to potential growth. Economic activity is being supported by still-accommodative monetary policy and financial conditions, as well as public infrastructure spending. The contribution to growth from household spending is projected to decline, as recently robust employment gains and growth in household income are expected to slow. Meanwhile, the combined contribution to growth from exports and business investment is expected to rise with foreign demand. With these anticipated shifts in the composition of demand, the economy is expected to progress on a more sustainable basis.
 
The fundamentals supporting the profile for GDP growth have solidified since October. Prospects for exports have improved in light of the stronger US outlook and higher commodity prices. Further, a reassessment showing that domestic housing fundamentals are stronger has raised the profile for residential investment. However, the uncertainty associated with the NAFTA renegotiations has increased, weighing further on the outlook for investment and exports.
 
The economy is estimated to have grown by 3.0 per cent in 2017. Strong growth brought output close to potential and was accompanied by a significant reduction in labour market slack. Growth is expected to slow to 2.2 per cent in 2018 and to 1.6 per cent in 2019.
 
CPI inflation picked up to 2.1 per cent in November, reflecting greater increases in the prices for gasoline and automobiles. Inflation is anticipated to fluctuate in the near term as various positive and negative temporary factors namely those related to gasoline, electricity and food prices dissipate over different time frames.
 
Inflation is expected to remain close to 2 per cent over the projection horizon.
 
With the Canadian economy close to capacity, the Bank is evaluating whether strong demand is motivating firms to increase investment, entrepreneurs to create new firms, and people to enter the labour force or to increase their working hours. All these developments would contribute to stronger growth in potential. In addition, the Bank is closely monitoring the dynamics of wages and inflation, including the implications of globalization and technology, to assess the interactions between capacity and inflationary pressures in the economy.
 
Revisions to historical data since October suggest that the level of business investment has been much higher since the start of 2014 than previously estimated. This stronger profile implies a larger capital stock and more production capacity. As a result, the estimated level of potential in the third quarter of 2017 was revised up by 0.2 per cent relative to the October Report.
 
Business investment increased production capacity in 2017. This has been enhanced by public infrastructure spending. In the first half of the year, business investment growth experienced a robust, broad-based rebound. It remained solid in the third quarter, with another strong contribution from investment in machinery and equipment. Further, the rate at which new firms are being created edged up in the third quarter, led by the goods-producing sector.
 
Increasing utilization should encourage ongoing solid investment growth, which would result in an expansion of capacity. Data for the third quarter of 2017 show that capacity utilization rates were rising across most industries. In addition, responses to the latest Business Outlook Survey indicate that capacity pressures picked up further in the fourth quarter and that excess capacity is now largely limited to oil and gas producing regions. A jump in investment-related imports of machinery and equipment in the fourth quarter of 2017 and higher investment intentions in the BOS point to continuing strong investment.
 
Capacity pressures have also led firms to ramp up their hiring. The national unemployment rate has fallen to a historically low level as a result of strong employment gains across industries and regions. The average number of hours worked now appears to have recovered from its low in early 2017. The Business Outlook Survey reports that labour shortages are more apparent and more intense than they were a year ago.
 
While wage growth has improved, underlying wage pressures remain modest. The rapid pace of hiring and swift decline in the unemployment rate in the past few months indicate that labour market slack is being absorbed more quickly than expected. However, several other factors are expected to constrain wage gains despite recent increases in minimum wages. The elevated long-term unemployment rate and relatively low youth participation rate suggest an availability of additional labour resources over and above the natural expansion of the labour force. The Bank's composite indicator of the labour market, which is designed to capture broad labour market developments, has fallen by less than the unemployment rate. In addition, global competition, which is likely leading to more outsourcing and automation, might also be weighing on wage growth.
 
Core inflation measures have generally continued to move up since mid2017 and ranged from 1.5 to 1.9 per cent in November. This gradual upward movement is consistent with declining economic slack and slowly building inflationary pressures.
 
After a strong performance in the first half of the year, economic growth moderated in the third quarter of 2017, as expected. Consumption growth remained strong, and business investment grew at a solid, albeit slower, pace. Exports declined sharply, however. In the fourth quarter, GDP growth is estimated to have been stronger than potential, raising the estimated range of the output gap to -0.25 to +0.75 per cent.
 
The economy is expected to grow above potential, at an average of 2.5 per cent over the fourth quarter of 2017 and the first quarter of 2018. Subsequently, quarterly growth is expected to moderate and average close to potential. With this growth trajectory and the economy operating near capacity in the fourth quarter of 2017, the level of output is expected to track close to that of potential over the projection horizon.
 
Financial conditions overall have been broadly stable. Even with recent interest rate increases, the stance of monetary policy in Canada remains accommodative and continues to support the level of economic activity. Policy rate increases in July and September of 2017 contributed to higher short-term rates. The rising short-term rates combined with comparatively stable long-term yields have resulted in a flatter Canadian yield curve, in line with developments in global markets. Despite this flattening, the yield curve continues to have a moderate positive slope. The Business Outlook Survey and Senior Loan Officer Survey report that, apart from higher prime rates, business-lending conditions either remained largely unchanged or eased slightly.
 
Consumption is expected to contribute meaningfully to growth in the near term, supported by ongoing strong job creation and elevated consumer confidence. However, in 2018-19, consumption growth is anticipated to moderate and the savings rate to increase in response to slower growth of household disposable income and higher interest rates. With higher interest rates, debt-service costs are expected to increase, thus dampening consumption growth, particularly of durable goods, which have been a significant driver of spending in recent quarters.
 
Elevated levels of household debt are likely to amplify the impact of higher interest rates on consumption, since increased debt-service costs are more likely to constrain some borrowers, forcing them to moderate their expenditures. An increased sensitivity of consumption to interest rates has been incorporated in the Bank's projection model since October, but it is still too early to determine whether this behaviour is showing up in the data on consumer spending. If this greater sensitivity fails to materialize, consumption could be stronger than anticipated.
 
Growth of household credit has slowed somewhat since the first half of 2017, even though some households may have pulled forward borrowing in anticipation of the new B-20 guidelines related to mortgage underwriting from the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions. This slowing is consistent with higher borrowing costs due to the two policy rate increases in 2017.
 
The contribution of housing activity to growth is expected to turn positive in the fourth quarter of 2017, mainly as a result of a rebound in resale activity in Toronto. Some of the strength in Toronto resales at the end of 2017 may reflect a desire to book transactions in advance of the effective date of the B-20 guidelines. Residential investment is now expected to be roughly flat over the projection horizon. The rate of new household formation is anticipated to support a solid level of housing activity, particularly in the Greater Toronto Area, where the supply of new housing units has not kept pace with demand. However, interest rate increases, as well as macroprudential and other housing policy measures, are expected to weigh on growth in residential investment, since some prospective homebuyers may take on smaller mortgages or delay purchases.
 
Business investment is expected to continue to provide a moderate contribution to growth over the projection horizon, taking into account the mixed effects of recent developments. Strength in spending on machinery and equipment is anticipated to continue in the near term before moderating somewhat, while the recovery of investment in non-residential structures is gradually gaining momentum. Underlying fundamentals are strong and would support a more robust growth trajectory were it not for the effects of heightened uncertainty around trade policy and increased incentives to shift investment from Canada to the United States as a result of US tax reforms.
 
Elevated uncertainty around US trade policy is expected to continue to restrain growth in business investment. Although their investment intentions indicate plans to boost spending, respondents to the Business Outlook Survey are increasingly concerned about the ongoing NAFTA renegotiations and rising protectionism more generally. Greenfield foreign direct investment into Canada has declined since mid-2016, especially from Europe but also from the United States, a possible sign of the effects of the uncertainty around trade policy. Trade-policy uncertainty is expected to reduce the level of investment by about 2 per cent by the end of 2019, an additional drag of 0.5 percentage points compared with the October projection.
 
The US tax reforms are anticipated to reinforce these uncertainty effects and dampen investment growth further. Firms may decide to redirect some of their planned investment spending from Canada to the United States to benefit from the lower corporate taxes. The negative effects of US tax reforms on Canadian investment have been introduced in this projection and are expected to subtract 0.5 per cent from the level of investment by the end of 2019.
 
The projected expansion in overall business investment is taking place despite a pullback in the energy sector associated with the recent completion of several large oil sands and offshore projects. Oil and gas investment is expected to be roughly flat over 2018 and 2019. The profile has been revised down relative to the October Report based on new information from consultations with firms in the energy sector and the recent softening in oil and gas drilling activity. Despite the rise in global oil prices, firms remain cautious about new investment projects, reflecting relatively weaker prices for WCS and Canadian natural gas, as well as uncertainty around pipeline capacity and the impact of other policy changes.
 
Despite the uncertainty around US trade policy, the projection for investment outside the energy sector has been revised up based on stronger expected demand. Healthy fundamentals, including rising capacity pressures, widespread positive business sentiment and an increasing need to improve competitiveness through digital technologies, are expected to support investment.
 
Export growth has resumed and exports are expected to grow broadly in line with foreign demand. The upward progression of exports was interrupted by a sharp decline in the third quarter of 2017, owing mainly to an anticipated adjustment in automobile production and the reversal of special factors that boosted growth earlier in the year. Export growth resumed in the fourth quarter: non-commodity goods exports turned positive, driven by a rebound in exports of consumer goods and machinery and equipment. Nevertheless, exports in 2017 are weaker than in the October Report.
 
Over the projection, exports of services and commodities are expected to remain solid. Non-commodity goods exports outside the auto sector are expected to grow roughly in line with foreign demand. However, past adjustments to vehicle production mandates will continue to exert a dampening effect on exports in the auto sector in 2018.
 
Positive revisions to economic growth in the United States, mainly in response to the effects of the tax reform legislation, are expected to boost the level of exports by about 1 per cent by the end of the projection horizon.
 

Yet, Canada's ability to benefit from an improving global outlook continues to be hindered by uncertainty around the status of trade arrangements. This uncertainty is weighing negatively on investment in Canada and the rest of the world, and thus on the export outlook. The spillover effects of trade policy uncertainty are estimated to be holding back exports by 0.7 per cent by the end of 2019, 0.3 percentage points more than had been anticipated in October.
 
CPI inflation is estimated to have averaged 1.8 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2017. Temporary factors, such as past electricity rebates, below-average food price inflation and exchange rate pass-through, have contributed to keep inflation below target in recent quarters.
 
Inflation is anticipated to continue to be close to 2 per cent. The effects of various temporary factors are expected to dissipate over different time frames. In particular, inflation will likely ease in January 2018, reflecting the transitory effects of elevated gasoline prices a year earlier. Inflation is then expected to rise as the temporary effects of past fluctuations in consumer energy and food prices fade. The drag from weak food inflation is expected to dissipate by the fourth quarter of 2018, three quarters later than previously expected, as recent developments and consultations suggest a more persistent effect from heightened competition among food retailers.
 
Compared with the October Report, higher prices for crude oil are expected to lift the inflation profile in 2018, but other sources of inflationary pressures remain broadly similar. The projection for inflation also incorporates the estimated effects of recent and scheduled increases in provincial minimum wages.
 
This projection is consistent with medium - and long-term inflation expectations remaining well anchored. The December 2017 Consensus Economics forecast for CPI inflation is 1.9 per cent in 2018. Responses to a quarterly question on long-term inflation expectations show an average of 2.0 per cent through 2027.
 
The prospect of a notable shift toward protectionist global trade policies remains the most important risk surrounding the outlook. While the Bank's base-case scenario incorporates the adverse effects of related elevated uncertainty on firms' investment and export activities, it is otherwise predicated on existing trade arrangements over the projection horizon.
 
The Bank is continuing to monitor NAFTA renegotiations. The Bank's calculations suggest that about 50 per cent of US imports of goods from Canada received NAFTA preferential tariff rates in 2016, with significant variation across industries. As well, NAFTA covers most services. At this stage, it is difficult to predict the possible outcomes of trade negotiations and the timing, incidence and magnitude of their effects.
 
Assuming existing trade arrangements continue, the Bank assesses that the risks to the projected path for inflation are roughly balanced. The evolution of risks since October is summarized in Table 4. While the risks highlighted below are similar to those in the October Report, several risks were partially realized and the Bank's current base-case projection was adjusted accordingly. As in past reports, the focus is on the most important risks for the inflation projection.
 
The Bank's base-case projection has been adjusted to incorporate negative spillover effects of greater uncertainty associated with NAFTA renegotiations. Nevertheless, even with a cautious projection for exports, non-energy goods exports could disappoint, given ongoing competitiveness challenges. As well, firms may respond to the expansion in foreign demand by investing outside of Canada rather than investing in and exporting from Canada.
 
While the base-case projection already includes some of the impact of strong demand on potential, labour productivity could be stronger than anticipated and could lead to faster growth of the economy's potential. Thus, inflation could be weaker than projected.
 
The outlook for US economic growth has been revised up to reflect stronger momentum and the direct implications of the recently legislated US tax reforms. However, growth could be even stronger if tax reform and deregulation were to trigger "animal spirits" in an environment of accommodative financial conditions, elevated equity prices and high corporate profits. The resulting boost to investment, as well as stronger household spending, would have positive spillovers for Canadian investment and exports.
 
The outlook for consumption in 2018 has been revised up in the base-case projection, because recent data have suggested stronger underlying momentum. It still remains the case that persistently elevated consumer confidence could lead to even stronger consumer spending, with a savings rate that remains close to or falls below its recent relatively low level rather than gradually rising. The vulnerabilities associated with household indebtedness would be exacerbated if the additional spending were financed by additional borrowing.
 
Imbalances in the Canadian housing market remain, particularly in the greater Toronto and Vancouver areas. A drop in house prices would likely dampen residential investment and consumption in these areas. Based on historical experience, direct spillovers to the rest of the country would be modest.