While the decision to focus monetary policy on price stability is fundamental, and therefore long-term, judgments about what policy actions should be taken require regular reconsideration. These judgments include an assessment of the economic factors affecting inflation, especially the strength of aggregate demand relative to aggregate supply. However, two other points need to be stressed before these factors are examined.
 
First, in analysing aggregate measures of inflation it is important to distinguish between movements in the general level of prices and movements in relative prices. Inflation exists when generalized increases in the prices of goods and services persist over time. Price stability means just the opposite - over time there should be no persistent increase in the average price paid for goods and services.
 
Thus, both inflation and price stability are identified in terms of what is happening to the general, or average, level of prices. This does not mean that prices of individual items will not change. In both situations - generalized inflation or price stability - some prices go up relative to other prices and some go down. It is these relative movements in individual prices that signal the need to move resources into or out of production.
 
Second, given the numerous factors and the lags involved in the inflation process, it is important to analyse more than one indicator of price change. In addition to analysing movements of the CPI, attention should be given to aggregate measures of producer prices. Prices that Canadian consumers pay and prices that Canadian producers receive can differ because not all Canadian-produced goods are consumed in Canada, and many goods consumed in Canada are produced elsewhere. Exchange rate movements and changes in indirect taxes can also affect aggregate consumer and producer price measures differently.
 
Inflation, as measured by the 12-month rate of increase in the core CPI, has been consistently in the lower part of the inflation-control band since early 1993. As of March 1995, core inflation was running at an annual rate of 2.1 per cent. The target band falls gradually from a range of 1 1/2 to 3 1/2 per cent in mid-1994 to 1 to 3 per cent at the end of 1995.
 
While core inflation was relatively steady over the past year or so, the total CPI jumped sharply in February 1995 to 1.8 per cent, from close to zero over the previous twelve months. The difference between core inflation and the total CPI in 1994 reflected the reduction of federal and provincial tobacco taxes early in the year. These tax cuts lowered the level of the total CPI by an estimated 1.3 per cent. The effect on the rate of inflation disappeared in February 1995. In addition, a partial reversal of these earlier cuts just prior to the February federal budget and higher gasoline taxes announced in the budget are estimated to have raised the level of the CPI by almost 0.2 per cent.
 
Because of the one-time nature of these indirect tax effects, the Bank has not had to react in terms of its monetary policy operations. If there had been evidence that these changes had affected underlying, or core, inflation, the Bank would have considered it necessary to respond.
 
For the balance of 1995, it appears that the year-over-year increase in the total CPI is likely to be somewhat higher than the core CPI because of higher food and energy prices. In March, the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was 2.2 per cent, compared with the core rate of inflation as noted above of 2.1 per cent.
 
The CPI is the most important measure of inflation, but other broad measures of inflation also indicate that inflation has remained low. The rate of increase of the gross domestic product deflator averaged 0.3 per cent during 1994. The fixed-weight GDP deflator, which is another useful measure of underlying inflation, rose 1.5 per cent over the past year.
 
The most important factors affecting inflation in the last year have been the excess capacity in product markets and slack in the labour market. As well, inflation expectations have diminished in response to the significant progress made towards price stability. At the same time, certain categories of price movements have had a significant effect on aggregate consumer and producer price measures. The two most important factors placing upward pressure on aggregate inflation measures have been commodity price increases and the effects on prices of the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar. There have also been declines in individual prices that have exerted downward pressure on aggregate measures of inflation. These have been most notable in the retail sector (as a result of heightened competition) and in computer prices.
 
The Canadian economy was considerably more buoyant during 1994 than had been expected at the start of the year, expanding by 5.6 per cent. Exports, particularly of manufactured goods, led the expansion, which was more broadly based than in the previous year, as increased capacity utilization led to more investment and strong employment gains. As well, higher commodity prices brought the resource sector back to pre-recession levels of activity. The associated increase in full-time jobs led to strong growth in consumption in the second half of the year, but in recent months the effects of higher interest rates have become apparent in reduced sales of homes and motor vehicles.
 
With consumers spending less on big-ticket items, the pace of economic activity appears to have slowed in early 1995 compared with the second half of last year. However, indicators of exports, imports, investment, and manufacturing shipments and orders point to continued solid expansion. Based on the available information, and factoring in the impact of the rail strike, it appears that total output expanded by around 3 per cent in the first quarter.
 
Despite stronger activity during the past year, the Bank estimates that the Canadian economy still had excess capacity going into 1995, amounting to an output gap of about 2 1/2 per cent in the fourth quarter of 1994, down from 5 per cent a year earlier.
 
The effect of the depreciation of the Canadian dollar on prices is potentially large. With the import content of the CPI estimated at about 20 per cent, the decline in the Canadian dollar over the past three years has had a significant impact. This effect may have contributed as much as 1 percentage point to the rise in the CPI during the past year.
 
The clearest example of the exchange rate effect can be seen in motor vehicles. However, it appears that prices of a number of other imported, or import-competing, consumer goods have only partially reflected the effects of depreciation. In most of these cases, increased competition in the retail and manufacturing sectors has resulted in downward pressure on prices.
 
World commodity prices (quoted in US dollars) have risen sharply in the past year. For Canadians, who are both major producers and users of raw materials, these price increases have been felt in a number of different ways.
 
The rise in commodity prices has been widespread across products. For Canadian producers the increases have been most pronounced in industrial materials. These prices, which had fallen to very low levels during 1991-92, rebounded sharply as the recovery in the world economy gathered momentum. Examples of large US dollar price rises during 1994 include pulp (69 per cent), newsprint (19 per cent), and base metals like nickel (60 per cent), copper (67 per cent) and aluminum (70 per cent). The rise in the Canadian dollar prices received by Canadian commodity producers has been magnified by the depreciation of the Canadian dollar and has been reflected in the marked 9 per cent rise over the past year in the aggregate industrial product price index as well as in the sharp rise in aggregate export prices.
 
For domestic producers, these commodity price increases represent a significant rise in costs. However, economy-wide there have been major offsetting factors working to contain total costs and thus aggregate prices.
 
Wages, the largest component of total costs, have risen very moderately. Overall wage increases have fluctuated between 1 and 2 per cent during most of the past year. New wage settlements have been running just above 1 per cent in the private sector and zero to negative in the public sector.
 
Another important factor in overall cost control has been productivity gains. Since 1990 there has been considerable investment in new technology in Canada. This restructuring effort resulted from a combination of events, including a major deterioration in Canadian competitiveness during 1987-90, increased global competition and the move to a low-inflation environment. The returns to restructuring are now showing up in the aggregate productivity data, although it is still too early to determine the extent to which recent productivity growth exceeds that of a normal economic recovery.
 
The combination of rising productivity and moderate wage growth has led to steady declines in unit labour costs for more than a year. Profits have risen sharply, particularly in the resource and manufacturing sectors. As a result, the gap between the level of real wages and productivity that opened up in the early 1990s - a key factor in continuing efforts to hold labour costs down - has begun to close.
 
Finally, aggregate prices have been restrained by two other factors: lower housing prices and lower costs for machinery and equipment because of falling computer prices.
 
When monetary policy actions are taken in response to changing economic circumstances, the Bank uses the concept of monetary conditions to capture the influence of both short-term interest rates and the trade-weighted exchange rate on the economy. The monetary conditions index constructed by the Bank combines both variables to provide a shorthand measure of the overall degree of tightening or easing of policy.
 
While the Bank constantly reassesses the appropriate level of monetary conditions needed to achieve its inflation-control targets, its operations must sometimes give precedence to steadying nervous markets.
 
During the past year, financial market developments in Canada were strongly affected by nervousness and volatility in world financial markets, which began shortly after US authorities started to raise interest rates in early February 1994. These external factors spilled over into Canada, where investors had already become increasingly concerned about the rising level of public debt and the political situation in Quebec. Throughout the spring, the dollar weakened and short-term interest rates rose sharply, leaving overall monetary conditions in Canada significantly tighter than at the start of the year.
 
Around midyear the Bank established an operational target range of 50 basis points for the overnight interest rate - a move designed to enhance the effectiveness and transparency of its operations in volatile markets. As markets stabilized during the summer months, the Bank lowered the range for overnight rates on three occasions, to encourage a decline in short-term rates. These actions were intended to reverse only part of the earlier tightening in monetary conditions, given the strengthening trend in the economy.
 
In October and November, short-term interest rates began to move upwards again, led by further increases in US interest rates. Initially, monetary conditions in Canada remained largely unchanged, as somewhat higher domestic interest rates were offset by a lower dollar. The Bank of Canada raised its overnight target range once in November.
 
In early December, investors again became worried about the possibility of further tightening by the Federal Reserve and its implications for Canada. In these circumstances, the Canadian dollar weakened further, short-term interest rates rose sharply and the Bank again adjusted its overnight target range upwards. Monetary conditions tightened, reversing the easing that had occurred around midyear. The Mexican currency crisis in late December added to the nervousness of international financial markets.
 
Downward pressure on the Canadian dollar intensified in early January 1995, and short-term interest rates came under sharp upward pressure. Primarily to calm markets, the Bank raised its operational target range for the overnight rate five times between early January and late February. These actions helped to steady the dollar, which in turn helped ease pressures on interest rates. The positive reaction by financial markets to the measures contained in the federal budget also provided an important steadying influence.
 
During the first quarter it also became increasingly apparent that the momentum in the economy was still stronger than expected and, with the degree of slack diminishing rapidly, some tightening in monetary conditions was warranted on that score. By March, monetary conditions were about 1 1/2 percentage points tighter on average than in the second half of 1994 and some 2 percentage points tighter than a year earlier. By mid-April, monetary conditions had tightened somewhat further because of a firming in the Canadian dollar.
 
In assessing the outlook for inflation, the Bank must consider various factors, including the implications of current monetary conditions for the future course of aggregate demand.
 
The most important element in Canada's external economic environment is the US economy, which grew by 4 per cent during 1994. It is the Bank's view that the US economy is in a state of excess demand, although there is little evidence of increased inflationary pressures in broad measures of prices and production costs. The Federal Reserve has raised short-term interest rates to avoid the buildup in inflationary pressures that could result if the economy continued to expand at a pace that maintains or adds to excess demand. The Federal Reserve's actions appear to be slowing the rate of expansion to a more sustainable pace.
 
Overseas, economic recovery is expected to remain relatively robust. Output in the four major European countries, which rose by an estimated 3 per cent during 1994, may increase by a similar rate this year. The situation in Japan is less certain, following the earthquake in early 1995 and the recent strength of the yen. Nonetheless, it appears that output in Japan should be up this year, albeit at a modest rate.
 
Given a favourable outlook for the US and overseas economies, it is also expected that commodity prices will remain firm. Historically, the average price of commodities exported by Canada has tended to fluctuate in line with the world business cycle. However, some prices have reached levels where it has become profitable to bring new sources of supply on stream.
 
Overall, external demand is expected to remain a strong positive factor for the Canadian economy. In contrast, domestic demand is likely to be held back by the recent rise in interest rates and by general government restraint.
 
The implications of federal and provincial budgets for aggregate demand are an important consideration in the conduct of monetary policy. Specifically, the magnitude and timing of fiscal policy actions affecting total demand in the economy must be considered in determining the appropriate path of monetary conditions. In the case of the recent federal budget, the policies announced stretch out and build up over several years.
 
Consideration of all these factors suggests that total demand will continue to expand through 1995 and take up slack. How much slack will remain at year-end is difficult to gauge, because of uncertainties in estimating both potential output and the strength of demand.
 
Recent private sector forecasts that have incorporated the effects of the February federal budget suggest that total demand will expand by 3 1/2 to 4 1/2 per cent in 1995. Given more momentum than generally expected in the economy and the Bank's estimate of close to 3 per cent growth in potential output for 1995, a further significant closing of the output gap by year-end seems likely. As noted earlier, the Bank's estimate of the output gap at the end of 1994 was 2 1/2 per cent.
 
This analysis indicates that the downward pressure that has been exerted on prices by excess capacity in product markets will persist through 1995, but to a lessening degree. Similarly, labour market conditions will continue to moderate wage and cost pressures.
 
A major source of uncertainty for inflation is the effect of past exchange rate depreciation. For the immediate future there seem to be two possibilities. One, assuming that all the impact on prices from past depreciation has occurred and that there is no further depreciation, the effects on the 12-month rate of increase of the CPI from the decline in the Canadian dollar would begin to lessen during 1995. Two, if demand conditions had delayed pass-through from the past depreciation, then the recent strengthening of demand could result in higher prices even in the absence of further depreciation. In the context of this second possibility, the fact that the economy is now operating with significantly less slack reduces the likelihood of offsets through further cost reductions. One possible offsetting factor could be still more competition and restructuring in the retail sector.
 
On balance, there would appear to be some risk that upward pressure from past exchange rate movements could result in the rate of increase in core CPI rising temporarily above the midpoint of the target band during 1995.
 
Expectations are also an important component in the outlook for inflation. Eighty-nine per cent of respondents in the latest quarterly survey of Canadian business attitudes conducted by the Conference Board of Canada expected inflation to be in the 1 to 3 per cent range over the near term. In the Conference Board's latest Quarterly Survey of Forecasters, it was expected that CPI inflation would be between 1 3/4 and 2 1/2 per cent for 1995, with an average of 2 per cent. The Board's latest compensation survey also points to little change in aggregate wage increases this year.
 
One measure that is sometimes used to calculate long-term inflation expectations is the difference between yields on government 30-year conventional and real return bonds. On this basis, inflation over the long term is expected to be close to 4 per cent. While this is down from 4 3/4 per cent in mid-1994, it is up from 3 1/4 per cent in mid-1993. It is difficult, however, to know how accurately this measure captures true inflation expectations. The market for real return bonds is small, and this measure also captures a premium for inflation uncertainty.
 
The monetary aggregates provide important information as indicators of near-term economic developments.
 
The most useful monetary aggregate for forecasting inflation one or two quarters ahead is the broad aggregate M2+. Even allowing for the recent substitution of deposits into longer-term mutual funds, the Bank's indicator model for inflation using M2+ predicts core inflation of around 1 per cent or less for the next two quarters.
 
The rate of increase of real M1 (the narrow monetary aggregate, M1, deflated by prices) provides useful information on future output growth. This indicator points to continued solid expansion of the economy, but at a rate below that recorded during 1994.
 
A low level of inflation for the past three years has resulted in a significant downward adjustment of inflation expectations in Canada. This progress towards price stability is in turn providing an important underpinning for good economic performance. Nonetheless, risks remain.
 
Over the near term, it appears that pressures from past exchange rate depreciation could move core CPI inflation into the upper half of the target band. To the extent that these pressures materialize, the concern for monetary policy is that they be temporary in nature and not generate expectations of future inflation pressures.
 
Beyond the short term (through year-end 1995 and into 1996), the main concern is proper gauging of the speed and extent of closure in the output gap. In the past, the momentum of the economy has often been underestimated at this point in the cycle.
 
When all of this is taken into account, the current outlook for inflation is consistent with the Bank's inflation-control targets.