The global economic expansion continues to strengthen and broaden across countries. Growth in the United States rebounded in the second quarter, and the expansion in the euro area appears to have firmed. Economic activity is also showing signs of improvement in some oil-exporting countries and emerging-market economies that were previously in recession. Global growth is projected to average around 3 1/2 per cent over the 2017-19 period, in line with the projections in the July Monetary Policy Report.
 
Inflation has remained below target across most advanced economies, reflecting past excess capacity, still-weak wage growth and, in some cases, temporary factors. Inflation in wages and prices is expected to rise gradually as existing slack is absorbed.
 
The global outlook remains subject to substantial uncertainty, notably around US trade policy as well as geopolitical developments. The Bank's base-case projection continues to include some judgment that acknowledges the potential adverse effects of uncertainty on investment.
 
Global financial conditions remain accommodative. Yields on long-term sovereign bonds have changed little on average since July; in particular, in the United States, Germany and Japan, yields have fluctuated within a narrow range. Stock market indexes in advanced economies have continued to climb amid improving economic sentiment and conditions. The US Federal Reserve's process of normalizing its balance sheet that began in October is expected to contribute to a modest and gradual steepening of the US yield curve. However, the announcement of these plans in September had a minimal impact on yields.
 
Partly reflecting increased uncertainty over US trade and fiscal policy, as well as softer inflation prospects, the US dollar had been weakening in 2017 against a basket of currencies, although it has regained some strength recently.
 
Economic growth in the United States rebounded in the second quarter, as anticipated in the July Report. Consumption growth improved after a weak first quarter. Business investment growth remained robust, supported by, but not limited to, the ongoing recovery in energy investment. In contrast, residential investment contracted following two quarters of strong growth, as spending on renovations and commissions on sales of existing homes declined.
 
The outlook for economic growth for the second half of 2017 is roughly unchanged from July. The recent hurricanes had a devastating impact on affected communities, with significant albeit transitory aggregate economic effects. Consumption, housing and business investment are likely to be negatively affected, resulting in a lower outlook for growth in gross domestic product in the third quarter. Recovery and reconstruction efforts are expected to provide a modest boost to economic activity starting in the fourth quarter.
 
Overall, economic fundamentals remain consistent with projected GDP growth of about 2 per cent on average over 2017-19. Business investment is expected to expand at a solid pace. Consumption growth is anticipated to stay firm, supported by strong labour market conditions. Net exports, however, will likely continue to be a drag on growth. As in July, the Bank's base-case projection does not incorporate any new fiscal or trade measures. While sizable tax cuts are under active consideration, material uncertainty remains about whether agreement will be reached on such a package and, if so, its size, timing and design. If stimulative fiscal measures were enacted, growth could be higher than projected. Likewise, growth could be lower if protectionist trade policies led to a generalized decline in cross-border co-operation.
 
Second-quarter growth in the euro area was stronger than expected and remained broad-based across member countries. Data since the July Report also point to more momentum in economic activity than previously anticipated. As a result, the growth outlook for 2017 is now above 2 per cent. Growth should moderate gradually in 2018, reaching about 1 1/2 per cent in 2019, roughly in line with the pace of expansion of potential output.
 
In Japan, economic activity in the second quarter strengthened significantly more than expected, resulting in an improved economic outlook for 2017. Growth was driven by a boost to public investment and a pickup in consumption. Overall, growth should slow to around 1 per cent over 2018-19, reflecting demographics and other structural factors, and a sluggish pace of nominal wage increases.
 
Inflation has remained soft and generally below target in several advanced economies. Given the lag between economic activity and inflation, the ongoing strength in growth can be expected to contribute to improvements in labour market conditions and, therefore, a gradual firming in wage and price inflation.
 
The softness in core inflation in advanced economies has mainly been due to past excess capacity. However, in contrast to the United States, the decline in many countries that started in 2016 was likely associated with prior appreciation of their currencies and with falling prices of goods imported from emerging markets, notably China. The effects of these factors appear to have largely dissipated, as suggested by the uptick in inflation in the euro area and Japan in recent months.
 
In the United States, core inflation started declining in 2017 despite the depreciation of the US dollar. A large part of this slowdown can be attributed to lower prices for services, such as telecommunications. Looking ahead, core inflation in the United States is expected to reach 2 per cent by 2019 as a tight labour market exerts upward pressure on wage inflation.
 
While the Bank assesses inflation dynamics through the lens of economic slack and inflation expectations, the continuing softness in inflation across a number of advanced economies calls for further analysis. One possible explanation is that the behaviour of inflation in advanced economies has changed, and inflation is now less responsive to changes in economic slack than in the past. Another possibility is that technological advances, such as the rise of e-commerce and the digital economy, may be playing a role. So far, available evidence suggests that the overall effects of these technological factors on inflation are small, but the Bank will continue to examine the potential role of these and other factors.
 
Economic activity in China has been somewhat stronger than anticipated, with GDP expanding robustly in the third quarter. Nevertheless, growth is expected to soften in the coming quarters, mainly as a result of earlier policy measures targeting the housing and financial sectors and a smaller contribution from fiscal policy. Despite some progress on financial sector deleveraging, financial stability risks remain elevated as total credit continues to expand at a strong pace. Looking ahead, economic growth is expected to moderate from 6.8 per cent in 2017 to 6.3 per cent in 2019 as it continues to shift toward a more sustainable pace and composition.
 
For oil-importing EMEs, the economic environment has remained generally favourable, with narrow credit spreads and sustained capital inflows. GDP growth should average about 4 per cent over 2017-19, supported by ongoing recoveries in countries previously in recession and progress on growth-enhancing reforms. In India, economic growth has been dragged down by the lingering adverse effects of the currency exchange initiative launched in late 2016 as well as by the transitory costs associated with the introduction of the national goods and services tax in July. Notwithstanding the effects on near-term growth, these and other major reforms are expected to support medium-term growth in India.
 
Growth in the "rest of the world" grouping is expected to increase from about 1 1/2 per cent in 2017 to around 2 3/4 per cent in 2019. The economic adjustment in oil-exporting countries is progressing as the impact from past declines in oil prices eases.
 
By convention, oil prices are assumed to remain close to their recent average of about US$55 per barrel , roughly US$5 higher than assumed in July. Prices have been supported by stronger-than-expected demand over the summer, with US demand for gasoline reaching a five-year high. Declines in US crude oil inventories over the last six months and a recent stabilization in the number of active US oil rigs suggest that the oil market is rebalancing.
 
Over the near term, risks to the oil price assumption are tilted to the downside. Prices could be lower if excess supply results from a pickup in shale drilling activity in the United States or from a deterioration in compliance with agreed production cuts by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and some other oil producers.
 
Prices of some non-energy commodities have also increased since July. Spot prices for base metals have risen by about 12 per cent in response to a combination of stronger global demand and commodity-specific supply factors. Strong steel production in China over the summer supported the rise in prices of certain base metals, such as iron, nickel and zinc. In addition, higher aluminum prices have been supported by cuts to capacity in China, while concerns over further disruptions to mining activity in the Philippines have boosted nickel prices. Lumber prices have increased, driven mainly by wildfires in British Columbia and the western United States and potential supply disruptions caused by the hurricanes in the United States and the Caribbean. In contrast, agricultural prices have declined following a seasonal drop in livestock prices and expectations of stronger global crop yields.
 
Agricultural prices are expected to stay near current lows, while some modest growth in prices of base metals, excluding iron, should be supported by strong demand and ongoing declines in inventories. The Bank of Canada's non-energy commodity price index is therefore expected to remain roughly flat over the projection horizon, given these contrasting underlying outlooks.
 
Economic activity continued to grow rapidly in the second quarter of 2017, exceeding expectations at the time of the July Report. Growth continued to be broadly based across regions and industries and has become more balanced across components of aggregate demand. In the first half of the year, growth was very strong. Consumption and residential investment were robust, and growth in exports and business investment picked up. In this context, excess capacity has declined more rapidly than expected, and the Bank now estimates the output gap to be between -0.5 and 0.5 per cent in the third quarter.
 
Looking ahead, the level of economic activity will be supported by rising ­foreign demand and the recent firming of commodity prices, still-accommodative monetary and financial conditions, and public infrastructure spending. The economy is expected to progress on a more sustainable path: the total contribution to growth from consumption and residential investment is projected to decline, in part because of recent interest rate increases, while the contribution from exports is expected to improve and that from business investment to remain steady.
 
The Bank's projection incorporates the effects of three important developments since July, namely, the policy rate increases in July and September, the appreciation of the Canadian dollar and the increase in commodity prices. It also reflects the Bank's current assessment of the following key issues: the level and future growth rates of potential output; the evolution of wages and inflation, together with the potential implications of globalization and technology; and the sensitivity of the economy to interest rates given elevated household indebtedness. Over time, the Bank will update its judgment as appropriate with additional data.
 
Largely as a result of the robust pace of growth in the first half of the year, real GDP is forecast to grow at 3.1 per cent in 2017. Relative to the July projection, growth for the year is revised up, mainly because of unexpected strength in household consumption and business investment in the second quarter. After moderating in the second half of 2017, GDP is expected to grow by 2.1 per cent in 2018 and 1.5 per cent in 2019. As such, economic activity is forecast to remain close to full capacity and at times possibly modestly above, depending on how the supply side of the economy evolves.
 
Consumer price index inflation has recently picked up from low levels, reflecting higher gasoline prices, dissipating drag from food inflation, and improving economic conditions. Inflation is expected to continue to rise toward 2 per cent as the temporary effects of past fluctuations in food and electricity prices fade. Compared with the July inflation projection, the stronger Canadian dollar is expected to have a dampening impact in 2018, while the more rapid absorption of economic slack is expected to have an opposite, albeit smaller, effect. In this context, inflation is projected to increase to close to 2 per cent over the course of 2018 and to remain around 2 per cent until the end of 2019.
 
The economy grew at a rapid pace in the first half of 2017, averaging just over 4 per cent growth at an annual rate. This exceptional strength reflected robust growth in consumer spending, underpinned by favourable financial conditions and rising household employment and income. Consumption growth has become more widespread across regions, since the rebound in incomes in energy-producing provinces is now more entrenched. A broad-based expansion in business investment and a surge in energy exports were also contributors to growth. However, after a strong first quarter, housing activity pulled back in the second quarter. The housing decline was driven by a contraction of resale activity in the Toronto market, which was partly in response to the measures introduced by the Ontario government in April. Overall, real GDP growth in the first half of the year was widespread, with more than two-thirds of industries and most major demand components contributing to the expansion.
 
Real GDP growth is expected to moderate to a still solid pace close to 2 per cent at an annual rate over the second half of the year as growth in consumption and investment slows and exports temporarily decline in the third quarter. Still, consumption growth is expected to remain solid, supported by ongoing growth in employment and income and elevated consumer confidence. The Canada child benefit introduced in 2016 will continue to support the level of consumption, although the effects on growth have dissipated. Recent data show a decline in drilling rig activity and weakness in imports of machinery and equipment. Nonetheless, business investment growth is expected to pick up later in the year, buoyed in part by the launch of some large projects.
 
The temporary decline in exports in the third quarter is largely due to scheduled reductions in motor vehicle production and the unwinding of temporary factors that boosted growth in the spring. However, with the reversal of these temporary effects, export growth is anticipated to rebound in the fourth quarter, in line with foreign demand. Housing activity is estimated to have declined further in the third quarter, dampened by the slowdown in Ontario, but is expected to increase in the fourth quarter, as resales have recently started to pick up.
 
Robust growth over recent quarters has contributed to a rapid narrowing of the output gap, and the Bank estimates that the Canadian economy is now operating close to capacity. This estimate incorporates an assessment of the impact of strong recent investment on potential output growth. The robust growth of demand, combined with declining excess capacity, is providing an important incentive for businesses to invest and hire more workers. New firms could also be created, and workers could increase their hours worked or participation in the labour force.
 
Growth in employment has remained strong at the national level and has been broad-based across sectors and regions. The unemployment rate has continued to fall, but its decline likely overstates the degree of improvement in the labour market. In particular, the Bank's labour market indicator, a composite indicator, is still relatively high. Its current level reflects the fact that the long-term unemployment rate remains elevated, average hours worked remain low and wage growth continues to be modest. With recent productivity gains exceeding wage increases, labour cost pressures have been relatively low. Moreover, according to the autumn Business Outlook Survey, there is clear evidence of ongoing slack in energy-producing regions. As well, binding labour shortages appear to be prevalent only in British Columbia and in specific sectors.
 
Taken together, these developments indicate that labour markets are not yet a source of inflationary pressures and that opportunities for further expansions of employment remain.
 
CPI inflation has increased in recent months, largely as expected. CPI inflation rose from a trough of 1 per cent in June to 1.6 per cent in September, mostly reflecting dynamics in gasoline prices. Hurricane Harvey's disruption of refining capacity temporarily boosted gasoline prices and, thus, inflation by 0.2 percentage points in September. Additional contributors to the recent rise in CPI inflation were the fading effects of factors such as weak inflation in food prices and dissipating economic slack. However, these two factors, together with the electricity rebates in Ontario, still contribute to keeping CPI inflation below the 2 per cent target. Moreover, the recent appreciation of the Canadian dollar is estimated to reduce projected inflation. Several other factors, including digitalization, may be having some dampening impact on inflation.
 
Inflation in the second half of 2017 is expected to be similar on average to that forecast in July. The impact of the change in the exchange rate is slightly greater, while that from economic slack is slightly less.
 
Core inflation measures also started to drift upward in recent months, consistent with declining slack in the past and the diminishing drag from weak food inflation. The range of core measures was 1.5 to 1.8 per cent in September. These levels are roughly consistent with estimates of the evolution of excess capacity over previous quarters.
 
Financial conditions for both households and businesses remain broadly stimulative but have become less so since the middle of this year. Market interest rates have risen, partly reflecting improvements in economic conditions in Canada and related increases in the Bank's policy rate in July and September.
 
The rise in bank funding costs prompted financial institutions to raise mortgage and consumer credit rates. For example, five-year fixed mortgage rates have increased by about 50 basis points since the July Report. The estimated effective rate for businesses has increased by about 50 basis points since early June, in line with business prime rates. In that context, the Bank's Business Outlook Survey and Senior Loan Officer Survey both report that, aside from the overall increase in interest rates, business lending conditions were broadly unchanged during the third quarter of 2017. The surveys noted that recent healthy firm performance and competition among lenders helped ease non-price borrowing conditions for businesses, while some firms in commodity and related industries saw a modest rise in borrowing costs.
 
The Canadian dollar has appreciated against the US dollar, reflecting higher commodity prices, narrower US-Canada interest rate spreads and the weaker US dollar. The US dollar remains somewhat lower than it was in July, despite firming in recent weeks.
 
The Bank projects that economic growth will slow and quarterly growth rates will average close to potential growth over 2018-19. The composition of GDP growth is anticipated to remain relatively balanced. Solid growth of foreign demand is expected to support export growth and promote business investment. Consumption and residential investment are projected to moderate as households respond to less-accommodative financial conditions and as macroprudential and other housing policy measures continue to weigh on activity in the housing market. Government spending is expected to boost growth over the coming quarters, reflecting previously announced fiscal measures.
 
Economic growth is expected to remain broad-based across sectors. The solid expansion of the service sector is projected to continue, and the recent strength in goods-producing industries is now more entrenched. Results from the Business Outlook Survey also suggest that strong indicators of future sales remain widespread across regions and sectors.
 
After rebounding in the first part of 2017, business investment is expected to grow at a more moderate, but steady, pace over the projection period. With the economy operating close to capacity, ongoing increases in household and foreign demand, solid profit margins and robust business confidence are expected to support growth in business investment. Results from the autumn Business Outlook Survey indicate that while intentions to increase investment spending have come down from recent high levels, they remain widespread across sectors and regions.
 
Data on business investment may not fully capture firm expenditures to increase capacity and productivity. For example, spending on cloud computing or other information technology infrastructure services is often treated as an operating expense rather than as an investment per se. Yet, such innovation may lead to stronger productivity and potential output for a given level of investment spending. The results of both the Business Outlook Survey and consultations conducted by the Bank indicate that businesses expect to continue to focus on digital technologies to grow their productive capacity.
 
The firming of global commodity prices and the improvement in the balance sheets of oil and gas companies will support a gradual expansion of commodity-related investment, but growth prospects are limited, given the assumed outlook for oil prices. Non-commodity business investment is expected to expand with the growth of demand in Canada's major trading partners. Nevertheless, uncertainty about US trade policy and structural challenges, including expected low trend labour force and productivity growth in Canada relative to history, are expected to continue to restrain investment growth.
 
As expected in July, Canadian export growth has shown temporary weakness in recent months, partly due to the expected retrenchment in automobile production in the third quarter. Over the projection, exports are anticipated to grow roughly in line with strengthening foreign demand. The growth of imports is expected to slow with decelerating domestic demand. However, the contribution of net exports to GDP growth over 2018 and 2019 is slightly weaker than anticipated in the July Report following the recent appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
 
Over the past year, the growth of exports of services, driven by transportation and travel services, has been solid and should continue at a similar pace. Non-commodity goods exports have also picked up recently, and several goods components, including industrial machinery and equipment, plastics and rubber products, and food and beverage products, are expected to benefit from global growth.
 
As a result of several ongoing challenges, the growth of non-commodity goods exports is expected to remain moderate. Deteriorating competitiveness and the relocation of production outside Canada by some multinational firms have contributed to a loss of productive capacity and a reduction in the global market share of Canadian goods exporters. An important example is recent developments in the auto industry. Uncertainty about proposed trade measures and the status of trade agreements is also assumed to be hindering Canada's ability to benefit from an improving global outlook.
 
Growth of commodity exports is expected to be modest over the next two years, since production and exports have been restrained by limited investment in new capacity in the sector in recent years. Over the longer term, these exports could grow more strongly if commodity prices increased further and investment and productive capacity expand.
 
Consumption growth is projected to moderate and residential investment is expected to contract modestly over 2018-19. Several factors are expected to weigh on household spending, notably, an anticipated slowdown in the growth of disposable income. Moreover, while financial conditions remain broadly stimulative, higher interest rates have increased the cost of new borrowing and of servicing outstanding debt. The higher borrowing costs are likely to dampen household spending, particularly on durable goods and housing. Given higher overall debt levels, such spending is expected to be more sensitive to interest rate changes than in previous cycles (see the Appendix for a description of recent changes to the modelling of household consumption and debt). While higher interest rates on consumer credit, home equity lines of credit and variable - rate mortgages affect borrowers immediately, the impact of the recent rate increases on holders of fixed-rate mortgages will be gradual. Mortgages with fixed rates of three to five years represent a large share of the total debt of households, and income gains should help fixed-rate mortgage holders to continue servicing their debt at renewal.
 
Other factors are also expected to weigh on housing activity. The level of housing starts is projected to decrease in the coming years, in line with an anticipated gradual slowing of population growth. Moreover, macroprudential and other housing policy measures, while contributing to more sustainable debt profiles going forward, are also expected to weigh on housing demand. In particular, the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions recently announced new guidelines aimed at reinforcing residential mortgage underwriting practices. These guidelines are expected to subtract about 0.2 per cent from the level of GDP by the end of 2019. Taken together, recent interest rate increases and macroprudential policy changes are likely to have a moderating influence on residential investment as some prospective homebuyers respond by taking on smaller mortgages while others delay purchases.
 
CPI inflation is expected to increase to around 2 per cent CPI inflation is anticipated to average 1.4 per cent in the fourth quarter and to move up to around 2 per cent in the second half of 2018, staying close to the target thereafter.
 
In the base-case projection, the gradual increase in projected inflation primarily reflects the unwinding of temporary factors. Downward pressures from below-average growth in food prices should completely dissipate by the beginning of 2018, while those from the electricity rebates in Ontario should last until the middle of the year. After subtracting an estimated 0.2 percentage points from inflation in the second half of 2017, pass-through effects of the stronger Canadian dollar are expected to become stronger, with a peak impact on inflation of -0.5 percentage points in the second quarter of 2018, before fading by the end of 2018.
 
This projection is consistent with medium - and long-term inflation expectations remaining well anchored. The September 2017 Consensus Economics forecast for CPI inflation is 1.6 per cent in 2017 and 1.9 per cent in 2018. A quarterly question on long-term inflation expectations shows an average of 2 per cent through 2027.
 
Based on the past dispersion of private sector forecasts, a reasonable range around the base-case projection for CPI inflation is ±0.3 percentage points. This range is intended to convey a sense of forecast uncertainty. A complementary perspective is provided using statistical analysis of the Bank's forecast errors, which suggests that a 50 per cent confidence interval around the base-case projection widens from ±0.3 percentage points in the fourth quarter of 2017 to ±0.6 percentage points by the end of 2019. Over the same period, a 90 per cent confidence band widens from ±0.6 to ±1.5 percentage points.
 
The Canadian economy is operating close to capacity, and inflation is expected to increase to close to 2 per cent over the next several quarters. In this context, the Bank is focusing on assessing the importance of four key issues.
 
The Bank is assessing the extent to which potential growth increases with strong demand, given that the economy is close to capacity. The base-case projection incorporates some effect of strong demand growth on potential.
 
Global and technological factors have lowered inflation in advanced economies in recent years. Their impact on Canadian inflation to date does not appear to be significant, but work in this area continues. In the Bank's projection, the dynamics of inflation in Canada reflect the temporary effects of sector-specific factors, exchange rate pass-through and the evolution of economic slack.
 
Despite recent labour market improvements, wage gains remain subdued and are likely to increase only gradually. The projection builds in scope for greater labour market participation and hours worked before wage increases would add meaningful upward pressure on inflation.
 
Finally, household spending is being influenced by high levels of household debt and various macroprudential and other measures targeting the housing market. The Bank's main policy model has been revised to reflect that households are more responsive to interest rates when they are carrying elevated debt loads. The projection also incorporates estimates of the effects of the new housing measures.
 
The Bank will continue to monitor all of these issues, given their significance for the inflation outlook.
 
The prospect of a notable shift toward protectionist global trade policies is the most important source of uncertainty affecting the outlook. Recent developments, such as the use of targeted discretionary measures by the United States, are increasing uncertainty about the status of current and future trade agreements. However, the Bank has chosen not to fully quantify the implications of more protectionist policies. More clarity is needed in order to narrow the range of possibilities, particularly regarding the specific details and timing of any policy changes. Nevertheless, as in July, the Bank attempts to better balance the risks around the outlook by incorporating at least some of the adverse impact of the elevated global uncertainty into the base case.
 
Aside from the uncertainty around global trade policies, the Bank's outlook for inflation is subject to several upside and downside risks originating from both the external environment and the domestic economy. Overall, the Bank assesses that the risks to the projected path for Canadian inflation are roughly balanced. As in past reports, the focus is on a selection of risks identified as the most important, drawing from a larger set of risks considered in the forecast.
 
The evolution of risks since July is summarized in Table 4. The risk of weaker exports and sluggish business investment in Canada has been modified to focus on the possibility of increased protectionist pressures and competitiveness challenges. As in July, the risk of higher potential output is discussed in conjunction with the risk of persistent weakness in inflation, highlighting the uncertainty surrounding the effects of structural factors and prolonged excess supply on inflation.
 
While the future of US trade policy is still unknown, a protectionist shift in the United States is already evident in several discretionary decisions. For example, the US administration has imposed countervailing duties on Canadian aircraft, and uncertainty around the outcome of the North American Free Trade Agreement renegotiations is elevated. Other negative effects are also possible if additional US measures are implemented. Although the Bank's projection for exports is cautious, there is a risk that exports will fall short of expectations, given the growing protectionist pressures and continuing competitiveness challenges. In this context, firms may respond to the growth of foreign demand by expanding their offshore production capacity rather than exporting from Canada. This movement offshore could lead to an additional drag on Canadian exports and business investment, since firms would hold back on expanding domestic capacity.
 
While many of the tame inflationary pressures in Canada and most advanced economies in recent years can be accounted for by economic slack and temporary factors, global structural factors may be playing a larger role than currently believed. As well, the trajectory of potential output could be higher than anticipated. As the economy approaches full capacity, business investment could rise by more than expected, and stronger economic activity could lead to the return of workers who had left the labour force or were underemployed. While significant uncertainty surrounds these effects, the level of potential output could be as much as 1 per cent higher than expected by the end of 2020. The stronger these effects are, the more likely firmer economic growth could be generated without creating additional inflationary pressures relative to the base case.
 
Uncertainty also surrounds the persistence of the effect of past excess supply on inflation and whether the relationship between the output gap and inflation has weakened.
 
Efforts toward deregulation and prospects for sizable federal corporate and personal tax cuts in the United States could boost US economic growth. Deregulation, if it enhances competitiveness in an environment of accommodative financial conditions, elevated equity prices and corporate profits, could help trigger animal spirits. A further improvement in business confidence could lead to an acceleration in the pace of investment, firm creation, innovation and productivity growth. In addition, potential tax cuts could provide a modest boost to consumption and investment growth, although the precise effects will depend on the timing, magnitude and distribution of any cuts. Stronger US household spending and public and private investment would have positive spillovers for Canadian business confidence, investment and exports.
 
Strong spending, combined with elevated consumer confidence, points to underlying strength. While recent data on motor vehicle and retail sales indicate a slowdown in the coming quarters, the recent strength of consumption could persist if growth in wages and household incomes were to increase faster than expected as the labour market approaches full employment. Moreover, the recent robust credit growth could last longer than anticipated. This would provide a boost to economic activity, but it could further exacerbate the macroeconomic and financial vulnerabilities associated with high household indebtedness.
 
A pronounced drop in house prices in overheated markets Imbalances in the Canadian housing market remain an important vulnerability, particularly in the greater Toronto and Vancouver areas. In the context of elevated levels of consumer indebtedness, households could be even more sensitive to interest rate increases than assumed in the base case, which could trigger an adjustment in house prices in regions with elevated valuations. A large regional decline in house prices would have important adverse effects on residential investment and on related consumption and real estate services in the affected regions. Such a fall in house prices could further weigh on consumption through negative wealth and collateral effects. Overall, a pronounced decline in house prices in some regions could have a material negative impact on the economic outlook in those regions, with modest direct spillovers to the rest of the country.