The Canadian economy continues to adjust to major global developments. These include a marked recovery in world economic growth and an associated increase in commodity prices; the growing global presence of major emerging-market economies such as China and India; and a realignment of world currencies, including the Canadian dollar. Canadian monetary policy is facilitating the adjustment by aiming to keep inflation at its 2 per cent target and the economy operating near its production capacity.
 
Early in the year, with core inflation below target and excess supply in the economy, the Bank lowered its target for the overnight interest rate to 2 per cent to support growth in domestic demand. Given the appreciation of the Canadian dollar in 2003, the Bank did not expect net exports (the difference between exports and imports) to make a material contribution to growth in aggregate demand in 2004 and 2005. But, in fact, in the first half of this year, exports grew much more vigorously than anticipated. As a result, the Canadian economy has moved up near its production capacity sooner than was projected in either the April Monetary Policy Report or the July Update.
 
Recent developments have reinforced the continuing need for economic adjustments in Canada. Largely reflecting the strength of global demand, world oil prices have risen well above the Bank's earlier assumptions. The prices of non-energy commodities are at high levels, and the Canadian dollar has strengthened further, which places additional pressure on some sectors that are highly exposed to international trade.
 
Over the period to the end of 2006, the Bank's base-case projection is for aggregate demand for Canadian goods and services to expand, on average, at about the same rate as potential output, which is estimated at 3 per cent. Given the effects of higher oil prices and the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar, the Bank projects growth to be slightly less than 3 per cent in 2005 and slightly more than 3 per cent in 2006.
 
With the economy expected to remain near its production capacity throughout the projection period, core inflation is projected to move back up to 2 per cent by the end of 2005.
 
Against this background, the Bank moved to reduce the amount of monetary stimulus in the economy by raising its target for the overnight rate to 2.25 per cent on 8 September and to 2.50 per cent on 19 October. Further reduction of monetary stimulus will be required over time to keep inflation on target, with the pace of interest rate increases depending on the Bank's continuing assessment of the prospects for factors that affect pressures on capacity and, hence, inflation.
 
The outlook for Canadian exports and imports is of particular significance in this respect, given the uncertainty associated with the ongoing adjustments to changes in the global economy, including changes in commodity prices and exchange rates. The risks surrounding global economic prospects relate primarily to the evolution of oil prices, the pace of expansion in China, the way in which current account imbalances in the United States and East Asia will be resolved, and geopolitical developments.
 
Core CPI inflation averaged 1.5 per cent in the first eight months of 2004, below the Bank's 2 per cent inflation-control target. At the same time, unexpectedly high prices for crude oil have contributed to a marked rise in the rate of increase in the total CPI.
 
The core rate of inflation was 1.5 per cent in August, up from 1.1 per cent last February. Other measures of the trend rate of inflation that the Bank follows were also below the 2 per cent target.
 
The slack in product markets, which had been evident through most of 2003 and into early 2004, contributed to keeping the core rate of inflation below the 2 per cent target through the first eight months of this year. The prices of import-intensive goods also continued to decline in the first eight months of 2004 as a result of further reductions in world prices for many consumer goods and the impact of the earlier rise in the Canadian dollar. Despite some volatility in intervening months, the overall rise in the core rate between February and August was about as projected in both the April Report and the July Update. With motor vehicle prices higher than expected, core inflation increased somewhat more than anticipated in the period from March to July. But in August, the core rate of inflation moved back into line with expectations, following renewed discounting of automobile prices. The 12-month rate of increase in consumer meat prices has also risen markedly in recent months, partly reflecting a reduced supply of chicken resulting from an outbreak of avian influenza in British Columbia's Fraser Valley.
 
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was 1.9 per cent in August, up from 0.7 per cent in February. This larger gain relative to the core rate was caused mainly by substantial increases in the consumer prices of gasoline and fuel oil from their levels a year earlier. The price of crude oil has continued to rise since mid-April, reflecting strong global demand for oil and heightened concerns about the risks of supply disruptions in a number of oil producing regions. Indeed, the price of oil is currently well above the levels in the base-case scenarios of both the April Report and the last Update.
 
Canada's real GDP advanced at an annual rate of 3.7 per cent in the first half of 2004, higher than that projected in the last Report. In particular, the increase in exports was significantly stronger than expected. Recent indicators for spending and activity suggest that economic growth was about 3 per cent in the third quarter of 2004, marginally less than anticipated in the July Update.
 
The broadly based surge in exports reflected continued strong growth in global economic activity, as well as a recovery from the unusually low level in mid-2003. Final domestic demand also rose considerably, especially at the beginning of the year. Household spending continued to increase at a robust pace because of past monetary stimulus and stronger gains in real incomes. Capital expenditures by businesses also rose substantially. Some of this increased demand was met by imports, although imports rose much less than exports. Since part of the increase in sales was likely unexpected by firms, inventories were also reduced.
 
Growth in the US economy slowed to 3.3 per cent (at annual rates) in the second quarter of 2004 from 4.5 per cent in the first quarter, owing to weaker growth in consumption. Higher oil prices were mainly responsible for dampening consumption, which is expected to rebound modestly in the third quarter. Evidence to date indicates that growth rose to about 4.5 per cent in the third quarter.
 
Canadian producers continue to adjust to developments in the global economy. These developments include a marked recovery in world economic growth; the associated increase in commodity prices; the growing global presence of major emerging-market economies, such as China and India; and large movements in the US dollar against most other major currencies, including the Canadian dollar. The impact of these developments on the demand for Canadian goods and services is causing changes in the composition of activity, employment, and capital spending among the various sectors of the economy, as well as major adjustments by many firms. Indeed, many companies in industries that are highly exposed to international competition are making significant modifications to their operations.
 
Between December 2003 and July 2004, output growth in Canada remained strong in those sectors with low exposure to international trade. Over the same period, however, the strength of global demand for Canadian goods and services has also led to sharply higher output in a number of industries highly exposed to international competition.
 
Business capital spending and intentions have also been importantly affected by key global economic developments.
 
Indeed, the growth of business investment since 2002 has been concentrated in sectors with low exposure to international competition, as well as in industries producing energy and other commodities. In the remaining industries that are highly exposed to international trade and, therefore, to exchange rate fluctuations, capital spending has fallen back, however.
 
The Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey suggested that, overall, the level of confidence among firms about sales prospects over the next 12 months remains about as high as it was in the summer survey, with firms in the West being significantly more optimistic than those in Central and Eastern Canada. Optimism about prospective capital spending also continues to be fairly high. Firms in most sectors still plan to increase their investment expenditures, with manufacturing continuing to be an exception.
 
More generally, it appears that many Canadian firms are still adjusting to developments in the global economy. Indeed, with continuing uncertainty attached to the outlook for global demand for Canadian goods and services, the likely path of world prices for energy and non-energy commodities, and the nature and extent of further changes in currencies, the size and timing of further adjustments by Canadian businesses remains uncertain.
 
Canada's economic growth in the first half of 2004 was higher than projected in the April Report. This, combined with a small upward revision to real GDP data for 2003, suggests that the Canadian economy has moved up near its production potential somewhat more quickly than was expected in the last Report. Indeed, the Bank's conventional measures of potential output and the output gap indicate that the level of economic activity was very close to full capacity by the second quarter of 2004. While there continues to be a wide confidence interval surrounding any estimate of the output gap, the Bank believes that its conventional measure provides a balanced assessment of how close the economy is to its capacity limits. This is confirmed by the proportion of firms reporting pressures on capacity in the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey.
 
Some indicators currently point to greater pressure on capacity than the conventional measure. For instance, capacity utilization in the non-farm, goods-producing sector was well above the 2000-03 average. As well, the number of companies adversely affected by labour shortages rose from the summer Business Outlook Survey. These labour shortages were widespread in the resource, trucking, business and personal services, manufacturing, and construction sectors. This last shortage is consistent with the capacity pressures that have been evident in the housing market for some time.
 
In contrast, other indicators suggest more slack than implied by the conventional measure of the output gap. Hours worked have been below trend, and wage increases continue to be moderate. The ratio of unfilled orders to shipments in the manufacturing sector (excluding aerospace products and parts) also remains quite low.
 
There are differences in capacity utilization across industries and regions, and some of these differences may well become more pronounced in the future as a result of the ongoing adjustment process to global changes. However, there is currently little excess supply in the Canadian economy as a whole.
 
Unit labour costs in the business sector in the second quarter of 2004 were up modestly from year-earlier levels, even though productivity increased only slightly over the past year. This reflected the fact that hourly labour compensation in the business sector rose by a mere 1 per cent between the second quarter of 2003 and the second quarter of 2004. However, the underlying rate of increase in wages, based on such measures as the average hourly earnings of permanent workers, seems to have been in a range between 2.25 and 3.25 per cent since the fourth quarter of 2003.
 
Further large year-over-year increases in the prices of Canada's commodity exports during the first half of 2004, resulting from strong growth in the world economy, contributed importantly to the pronounced increase in the annual rise in the chain price index for GDP (a broad price measure of goods and services produced in Canada) between the fourth quarter of 2003 and the second quarter of 2004. However, the prices of non-energy commodities have edged down slightly since mid-2004. Upward revisions to forecasts for US crop production contributed to a decline in grain prices, and the prices of forest products have also eased as a result of somewhat weaker demand. In contrast, strong world demand has led to firmness in metals prices.
 
Financial conditions in Canada have been very favourable since the April Report. The yields and spreads on corporate bonds are broadly unchanged and remain below their historical averages, as strong profitability offsets concerns about the possible impact of higher interest rates in the future. Canadian equity markets have moved higher since the time of the last Report, and remain well above the levels seen a year ago. The solid earnings performance of Canadian banks, together with increased competition among financial institutions and between financial institutions and capital markets for business lending, has contributed to easier bank-lending conditions.
 
Favourable financial conditions and ongoing improvements in business balance sheets have led to a strengthening of total business credit growth, which is approaching a level in line with its historical averages. There has been a particularly brisk pickup in short-term business credit over the past few months - largely in the form of loans from chartered banks. This increase was due to lower borrowing costs, easier terms and conditions, and a slight increase in the demand for credit. Long-term business credit continued to grow solidly, supported by healthy issuance of bonds and equities in capital markets. However, most of the increase in business credit seems to have been directed towards general business operations rather than increased investment.
 
Household credit advanced at an accelerated pace, with both consumer credit and residential mortgage credit contributing to the rise. This pickup suggests that low interest rates and solid income growth are still bolstering consumption and housing investment.
 
Yields on shorter-term bonds in both Canada and the United States have risen since the last Report, driven by higher policy rates and expectations of further increases. Yields on longer-term bonds, in contrast, have shifted down slightly. Furthermore, bond yields are generally well below the peaks reached in May and June of this year. The early summer peak in yields reflected both the perceived beginning of the tightening phase in the US interest rate cycle and growing optimism about the strength of the US and global recoveries. Subsequent concerns over the summer months about a US slowdown, combined with record high oil prices and the dampening effect that they could have on consumption in several countries, have led to a sharp drop in yields from those earlier levels. Spreads between the yields on Canadian and US government bonds have generally widened over the period, largely as a result of movements in US yields.
 
Although the Canadian dollar also exhibited significant movements over the period, it is broadly stronger since the time of the last Report, having appreciated by slightly over 7 per cent relative to both the US dollar and the C-5 index of currencies. By mid-May, when the growth outlook in the United States was at its most optimistic, the Canadian dollar had fallen to approximately 71.5 cents US. Following this, however, a combination of weaker-than-expected US growth, stronger Canadian growth, and firming commodity prices contributed to the appreciation of the Canadian dollar, which is currently trading at close to 80 cents US.
 
The global economy is expected to continue to expand over the next two years, fuelled by robust growth in Asia, somewhat above potential growth in the United States, and moderate growth in Europe and Japan. The pace of expansion will be dampened by the recent sharp increase in oil prices, however, and by a move to higher interest rates as economies currently experiencing excess supply conditions move closer to full production capacity. The Bank's base-case projection calls for world economic growth to moderate from about 4.75 per cent in 2004 to about 4 per cent in 2005, and to pick up to about 4.25 per cent in 2006.
 
While the outlook is favourable, there are a number of uncertainties, especially beyond mid-2005. The timing and extent of fiscal consolidation in most major economies is unclear at this time. More broadly, the form of the resolution of current account imbalances, notably those in the United States and East Asia, is difficult to ascertain. And there remain ongoing geopolitical concerns.
 
Over the next two and a half years, the Bank's base-case projection for the US economy is for growth at a rate slightly faster than that of its production capacity. The key economic driver in the United States is expected to be strong growth in business investment, responding to underinvestment in recent years and to very favourable financing conditions. Productivity gains from past and future investments and capital deepening are expected to maintain the growth of potential output at about 3 1/2 per cent. The past depreciation of the US dollar should boost net exports, while the recent sharp increase in oil prices, together with a reduction in monetary stimulus, and some assumed fiscal consolidation, will dampen growth in household spending. The output gap, estimated at 1 per cent in the third quarter of 2004, is projected to narrow further during 2006.
 
In Europe, the recovery, although uneven, is now somewhat more firmly anchored. Robust growth in some countries, such as the United Kingdom, is counterbalanced by less-favourable prospects in Germany and Italy. The recovery in Japan is expected to be sustained, albeit at a slower pace than recorded at the end of 2003 and early 2004. Emerging-market countries in Asia should continue to contribute positively to world growth if China successfully moves towards a more sustainable growth path.
 
There are risks to the outlook for 2005. On the downside, the US economy may slow more than expected, and the Chinese economy may slow more abruptly than projected. On the upside, investment growth and inventory rebuilding in the United States may be stronger than expected, and the Chinese economy may not slow as much as projected.
 
The US-dollar prices of non-energy commodities are expected to remain at a relatively high level over the next two years as a result of the global economic expansion, although they are likely to ease over time as new supplies come on stream. The price of crude oil is assumed to remain above US$50 per barrel in the first half of 2005 and to ease to about US$43 per barrel by the second half of 2006. Natural gas prices, which will likely move up with the onset of the winter heating season, are expected to remain at relatively high levels through 2006. These assumptions are consistent with the current market expectations embodied in futures prices. The Bank's base-case scenario for oil prices is well above that used in both the last Report and Update.
 
Continued strong growth of final domestic demand is expected to contribute importantly to economic expansion in Canada through to 2006. Business investment is projected to strengthen further as a result of strong growth in the global economy and the resulting high level of commodity prices, very favourable financial conditions, and reductions in the prices of imported machinery and equipment. Solid growth in consumer spending should be sustained by further gains in real incomes. Housing investment is expected to stabilize at current high levels, as supply catches up with demand. And spending by all levels of government is projected to rise broadly in line with revenues as governments strive to maintain fiscal balance.
 
While continued global economic expansion implies further gains for Canadian exports, this is projected to be more than offset by faster growth in imports. The past appreciation of the Canadian dollar is expected to continue to dampen the growth of Canada's exports and to boost that of imports through 2005.
 
However, it remains difficult to analyze Canada's international trade volumes in terms of the underlying fundamentals. At mid-2003, the levels of both exports and imports seemed well below those indicated by their historical relationships with measures of real income and relative prices. Since then, exports have moved back up near their predicted long-run levels, while imports continue to be much lower than expected. These puzzling developments, together with substantial and ongoing revisions to the trade data, make the projection of the future contribution of net exports to GDP growth particularly uncertain. More generally, given the various forces at play in the global economy, there are risks around our projections for imports and exports, and for business investment.
 
Higher-than-expected oil prices, both actual and prospective, should tend to reduce demand for Canadian exports, raise production costs for Canadian firms, and dampen household spending, all else being equal. Over time, they should also lead to higher capital spending and output by energy-producing firms. However, given the time necessary for regulatory approvals before major new projects can proceed, and given tight markets for many inputs, including skilled labour, the impact of higher oil prices on the capital expenditures of energy-producing companies is expected to be limited in the short term. Thus, higher energy prices are likely to have a small negative effect on Canadian GDP in the near term, before the positive impact on capital spending and energy output in Canada becomes more pronounced.
 
The Bank's base-case projection for Canada calls for real GDP growth to average about 3 per cent (the estimated growth rate of production capacity), at an annual rate, over the period from the second half of 2004 to the end of 2006. Given the effects of higher oil prices, including a slowing in US economic expansion, and the anticipated further dampening of net exports arising from the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar, growth is expected to be slightly less than 3 per cent during 2005 and slightly more in 2006. This implies growth, on an annual average basis, of just under 3 per cent in 2004 and 2005, and about 3.25 per cent in 2006.
 
The projection for growth in 2004 is a little higher than in the April Report and the July Update, whereas the projection for 2005 is lower. This growth projection for 2005 is also lower than the latest Consensus outlook.
 
This growth scenario implies that the Canadian economy may experience some small renewed excess supply in 2005 before returning close to its production capacity by mid-2006. The base-case scenario assumes further withdrawal of monetary stimulus over time to keep the economy near its production capacity and achieve the inflation target.
 
While most indicators of short-term inflation expectations that the Bank follows have moved up modestly since mid-April, many of the key medium- and longer-term measures remain close to 2 per cent. In the regular survey reported in the autumn issue of the Conference Board of Canada's Index of Business Confidence, 72 per cent of respondents expected prices, in general, to rise over the next six months at a rate of 2 per cent or less. This is a lower percentage than reported nine months earlier. As well, while just under 90 per cent of firms in the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey expected CPI inflation to be within a range of 1 to 3 per cent, on average, over the next two years, 54 per cent of respondents expected inflation to be in the upper part of the range. On the other hand, the average private sector forecast for total CPI inflation in both 2004 and 2005 is around 2 per cent. Consensus forecasts of inflation for 2006 and beyond also continue to be very close to 2 per cent.
 
There is a heightened risk that the recent surge in the global prices of energy may pass through to the prices of non-energy goods and services. Recent experience suggests that this pass-through effect is likely to be relatively small and spread out over a period of about two years. However, this experience may understate the pass-through of the recent increase in energy prices owing to its expected persistence.
 
On the other hand, the appreciation of the Canadian dollar since early 2003 is expected to continue to exert some slight downward pressure on core inflation.
 
Increases in average hourly earnings of permanent workers are expected to rise somewhat between now and 2006. At the same time, with growth in labour productivity expected to pick up over this period, the projected year-to-year increase in unit labour costs, while rising, should be at or below 2 per cent through the projection horizon.
 
Growth in the narrow money aggregates - M1+ and M1++ - has continued its upward trend since the last Report. Although the pace moderated somewhat in July and August, it remains strong on a year-over-year basis. This strength is broadly consistent with the low interest rate environment and suggests strong output growth in coming quarters.
 
Since the last Report, the growth of broad money - M2++ -  has continued to recover from the low levels of 2003. This recovery is attributed to the faster growth of the narrow money aggregates and, to a lesser extent, faster growth in non-money-market mutual funds. The stronger growth in M2++ points to a reduction in the risk of disinflationary pressure.
 
The excess supply in the Canadian economy, which was evident through most of 2003 and into early 2004, should keep core inflation slightly below longer-run expectations over the next few quarters. The past appreciation of the Canadian dollar is also expected to exert a little downward pressure on the core rate through 2005.
 
The year-over-year rate of increase in the core CPI is projected to remain at about 1.5 per cent for the rest of this year. This outlook incorporates larger monthly increases in the seasonally adjusted core CPI relative to those experienced in the first eight months of 2004, because recent price discounting for such items as clothing and non-shelter services is expected to moderate, and annual increases for tuition fees and property taxes are anticipated. In view of the volatility in the core rate observed in 2004 to date, the level of uncertainty surrounding the near-term monitoring of core inflation is somewhat higher than normal.
 
With the economy operating near its potential over the projection period, the effects of other factors roughly cancelling each other, and inflation expectations remaining well anchored, the core rate of inflation is projected to move up to the 2 per cent target by the end of 2005 and to remain at 2 per cent through 2006.
 
Developments in the markets for crude oil will continue to have a crucial impact on the outlook for the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI. Based on the assumption that the price of crude oil will remain above US$50 per barrel through to mid-2005, total CPI inflation is likely to rise near the top of the target range and stay there until the middle of next year. With the WTI price of oil assumed to ease below US$50 per barrel in the second half of 2005 and then to decrease further to US$43 per barrel by the second half of 2006, total CPI inflation should fall sharply in the second half of next year and stay below the core rate of inflation through 2006.