The global economic recovery is under way, supported by continued improvements in financial conditions and stronger domestic demand growth in many emerging-market economies. While the outlook for global growth through 2010 and 2011 is somewhat stronger than the Bank had projected in its October Monetary Policy Report, the recovery continues to depend on exceptional monetary and fiscal stimulus, as well as extraordinary measures taken to support financial systems.
 
Economic growth in Canada resumed in the third quarter of 2009 and is expected to have picked up further in the fourth quarter. Total CPI inflation turned positive in the fourth quarter and the core rate of inflation has been slightly higher than expected in recent months. Nevertheless, considerable excess supply remains, and the Bank judges that the economy was operating about 3 1/4 per cent below its production capacity in the fourth quarter of 2009.
 
Canada's economic recovery is expected to evolve largely as anticipated in the October Report, with the economy returning to full capacity and inflation to the 2 per cent target in the third quarter of 2011. The Bank projects that the economy will grow by 2.9 per cent in 2010 and 3.5 per cent in 2011, after contracting by 2.5 per cent in 2009.
 
The factors shaping the recovery are largely unchanged - policy support, increased confidence, improving financial conditions, global growth, and higher terms of trade. At the same time, the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar and the low absolute level of US demand continue to act as significant drags on economic activity in Canada. On balance, these factors have shifted the composition of aggregate demand towards growth in domestic demand and away from net exports. The private sector should become the sole driver of domestic demand growth in 2011.
 
The main risks to the outlook for inflation are those identified in the October Monetary Policy Report. Risks remain elevated, although they have continued to diminish gradually with the consolidation of the recovery in the global and Canadian economies.
 
The main upside risks to inflation are associated with the possibility of a stronger-than-anticipated global recovery. It is possible that the recovery in global demand could be more vigorous than projected, resulting in stronger external demand for Canadian exports. A related risk is that Canadian domestic demand could be more robust than projected.
 
On the downside, there is the risk that persistent strength of the Canadian dollar could act as a significant further drag on growth and put additional downward pressure on inflation. Another important downside risk is that the global recovery could be even more protracted than projected.
 
While the Bank judges that these underlying macroeconomic risks are roughly balanced, the overall risks to the inflation projection are tilted slightly to the downside as a result of monetary policy operating at the effective lower bound.
 
Over the medium term, global macroeconomic imbalances continue to pose significant risks to the outlook.
 
On 8 December 2009 and 19 January 2010, the Bank reaffirmed its conditional commitment to maintain its target for the overnight rate at its current level of 1/4 per cent until the end of the second quarter of 2010 in order to achieve the inflation target. In its conduct of monetary policy at low interest rates, the Bank retains considerable flexibility, consistent with the framework outlined in the April 2009 Monetary Policy Report.
 
The global economic recovery is under way, supported by continued improvements in financial conditions and stronger domestic demand growth in many emerging-market economies. Global economic and financial developments have been slightly more favourable than projected in the October Monetary Policy Report, and the outlook for global economic growth through 2010 and 2011 is somewhat stronger. Nonetheless, the recovery is still expected to be more subdued than usual. Growth is heavily dependent on the exceptional monetary and fiscal policy stimulus provided worldwide, as well as the extraordinary measures taken to support financial systems in many advanced countries.
 
The turnaround in global economic activity, which began in the second quarter of 2009, continues to strengthen, in line with the growth projections in the October Report. Economic activity in emerging-market countries - most notably China - is growing at a rapid pace, and the recovery has now extended to most of the advanced economies, with positive output growth recorded in both North America and the Euro area in the third quarter. While unemployment rates remain high in most major advanced countries, there are signs that the pace of deterioration in labour market conditions has started to ease. Purchasing manager indexes have been rising in all major regions and are now at levels that are consistent with economic expansion. Large output gaps and the absence of wage pressure have kept underlying inflation in the major economies subdued. Headline inflation rates have nonetheless rebounded, since sharp declines in energy prices from 2008 are no longer holding down measured inflation.
 
Monetary authorities in advanced economies continue to provide strong support for the recovery, and this has resulted in progressive improvements in financial conditions. In addition, government initiatives to arrest the economic decline and prime the recovery appear to have been better targeted and more effective than anticipated. A number of sectors, most notably automotive and housing, have benefited from these programs.
 
The US economy began to recover in the third quarter of 2009, registering growth of 2.2 per cent. Larger-than-expected improvements in financial wealth have supported consumption, and stronger growth in the rest of the world, primarily in emerging Asia, helped to boost exports. The Bank estimates that US growth in the fourth quarter rose to 4.6 per cent, driven principally by an important contribution from inventories, continued robust growth in exports, and steady increases in residential construction. Motor-vehicle production is also estimated to have risen more quickly than previously anticipated.
 
While GDP growth in the Euro area, at 1.7 per cent, came in slightly weaker than expected in the third quarter, indicators suggest that the recovery is becoming more firmly entrenched. The three largest economies - Germany, France, and Italy - all reported an upturn in industrial production for the first time since the first quarter of 2008. While the recovery is still tentative in Japan, business confidence and corporate profits, supported by strong export demand, have improved recently.
 
China's third-quarter GDP release reported year-over-year growth of 8.9 per cent, underpinned by strong sales of durable goods, increased investment in housing, and rising exports, as the effects of the large fiscal stimulus and accommodative monetary and credit policies continue to be felt. Emerging concerns about possible overheating in China have prompted authorities to tighten credit conditions slightly to mitigate inflationary pressures.
 
The Bank's index of commodity prices rose moderately from its level at the time of the October Report, as natural gas prices firmed and non-energy commodity prices rose in response to greater-than-expected demand from emerging Asia.
 
Financial conditions in advanced economies have improved and are contributing to the emerging global recovery. Equity markets have recovered substantially over the past three quarters, and firms have enjoyed greater access to capital markets, with global corporate bond issuance reaching record levels. Borrowing costs also remain low as credit spreads continue to decline. Bank profits and capitalization have generally strengthened worldwide. Underpinning all of these improvements are the historically low official interest rates maintained by all major countries.
 
Mortgage rates remain close to record lows in the United States, aided by targeted central bank purchases. Improvements in the non-conforming mortgage market have been more modest, however, and securitized markets remain impaired, with public sector measures continuing to provide important support. Despite the narrowing in spreads and generally low interest rates observed in many countries, lending to households and businesses, especially small and medium-sized enterprises, remains restricted, reflecting the effect of past and prospective loan losses on banks' capital, as well as uncertainty about the impact of regulatory reforms on required bank capital and liquidity.
 
Yields on long-term government bonds have risen since the last Report, reflecting a more positive economic outlook. Indeed, some countries have started to raise interest rates and withdraw unconventional measures in anticipation of stronger growth and emerging price pressures. Recent events have also focused market attention on the potential sovereign credit risk associated with mounting debt levels in a number of countries.
 
Recent indicators point to a more favourable outlook for global economic growth in 2010 than previously anticipated. The Bank now expects the world economy to grow at a rate of 3.7 per cent in 2010 and 4.1 per cent in 2011. While sustained, the projected recovery is relatively gradual, considering the depth of the recession. The revisions to the outlook for 2010 reflect further improvements in global financial conditions, stronger growth in emerging Asia, and additional fiscal programs to support domestic demand in advanced economies. The growth of private sector demand in advanced countries is nevertheless expected to remain relatively weak, as households repair their balance sheets, businesses restructure, temporary fiscal incentives come to an end, and financial intermediaries continue to pursue conservative lending strategies in an effort to rebuild capital.
 
In the United States, growth in 2010 and 2011 is projected to be slightly higher than previously expected, owing to stronger-than-expected growth in consumption and exports, as well as additional fiscal measures. Nonetheless, the recovery of domestic demand in 2010 is still expected to be relatively weak, with much of the anticipated growth attributable to past and ongoing fiscal and monetary stimulus. Growth in consumer spending will be weaker than in past recoveries, since households still need to rebuild their wealth and may face limited access to credit. The household savings rate is expected to rise to over 6 per cent in the next two years (from a low of 1.2 per cent in the first quarter of 2008). The growth of business investment in commercial real estate will likely remain weak, owing to rising vacancies and falling property prices. Exports are expected to grow substantially, supported by a weaker US dollar and a faster-than-anticipated recovery in overseas economies. Higher productivity growth and lower unit labour costs have also made US goods more competitive. Net exports are not expected to make a positive contribution to GDP growth until the second half of 2010, however, because imports will also rebound sharply as domestic demand recovers.
 
Economic growth in the Euro area is projected to be somewhat stronger in 2010 than previously expected, supported by increased export growth and a modest improvement in the outlook for labour markets. Consumer confidence has also improved, and proposed tax cuts in Germany could provide some additional support in the near term. However, concerns about future fiscal tightening in the Euro area and possible limitations on the availability of bank credit could dampen growth in subsequent periods. Growth in Japan is being sustained by expansionary monetary and fiscal policies and by strong Asian demand for Japanese products, but is expected to remain modest through 2010-11, given high unemployment and weak wage growth. In addition, business investment is likely to be constrained by high excess capacity.
 
The Chinese economy is expected to grow by more than 9 per cent in each of the next two years, with an expanding share of private investment and consumption, and less reliance on government subsidies, public investment, and exports. As a result, domestic demand should play a greater role in China's growth than in the past, helping to reduce global imbalances. Many emerging-market economies will benefit from China's sustained growth and rising demand for commodities, further supporting the global recovery.
 
After declining by over 30 per cent in 2009, on a year-over-year basis, commodity prices are expected to increase over the next two years as the global recovery takes hold. Based on futures markets, oil prices are assumed to rise to around US$88 per barrel in 2011. The Bank projects non-energy commodity prices to increase by about 10 per cent in both 2010 and 2011.
 
The Bank expects that growth in the global economy will accelerate over the next two years, but that the pace of the recovery in advanced countries will be moderate. It will take time to repair household and bank balance sheets, and for financial conditions to return to normal. In the near term, growth in real output will depend to a significant degree on past and ongoing fiscal and monetary stimulus. Although global current account imbalances narrowed during the recession, some reversal can be expected as economies recover and commodity prices strengthen. Further corrective policy action will be required over the medium term to put global growth on a strong, yet sustainable and balanced, path.
 
The Canadian economic recovery is expected to evolve largely as anticipated in the October Report, with the economy returning to full capacity in the third quarter of 2011. While core inflation has remained slightly higher than projected in recent months, total inflation has rebounded as expected. The stickiness of core inflation since the beginning of the year is likely related to the resilience in wage growth. With wage growth expected to stay at the more moderate levels seen recently, and with excess supply being gradually absorbed, both core and total CPI inflation are expected to return to 2 per cent in the third quarter of 2011.
 
Although real GDP in Canada contracted for three consecutive quarters, the magnitude of the downturn was more modest than in other major advanced economies. In particular, domestic demand held up much better in Canada than elsewhere, reflecting the soundness of Canada's banking system, relatively healthy household and corporate balance sheets, and the speed and scale of monetary policy actions. Nevertheless, the Canadian economy experienced a severe recession, owing largely to the downturn in sectors of the US economy that are particularly important for Canadian exports, such as the automotive and housing sectors.
 
Economic growth resumed in the third quarter of 2009, with real GDP increasing by a meagre 0.4 per cent (at annual rates), less than had been anticipated in the October projection. A sharp pickup in domestic demand and a rebound in exports were mainly offset by a surprisingly large surge in imports. Real gross domestic income increased significantly, however, reflecting an improvement in Canada's terms of trade.
 
Third-quarter growth in final domestic demand was broad based and stronger than expected. The contribution of government expenditures to growth increased further, and household spending continued to recover. An unexpected surge in investment in machinery and equipment also contributed to the pickup in domestic demand. Overall, sales rebounded sharply, and firms continued to draw down inventories, resulting in a decline in the stock-to-sales ratio. Net exports exerted a substantial and larger-than-expected drag on growth. The 36 per cent increase (at annual rates) in imports was unusually large, even after accounting for the surge in investment and the appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
 
The pace of economic growth in Canada is expected to have accelerated to 3.3 per cent in the final quarter of 2009, with final domestic demand and exports continuing to grow rapidly and import growth moderating.  Both household and government spending are projected to contribute to the ongoing strength in final domestic demand, while business investment is expected to have undergone a temporary correction. Recent indicators suggest that residential investment posted another large increase, driven by buoyant activity in the resale market. Prices for resale housing have increased markedly with the rebound in consumer confidence and as record-low mortgage rates have increased affordability. Housing starts also picked up towards a level consistent with demographic requirements.
 
In the October Report, the Bank revisited its assumptions for both trend labour productivity and trend labour input, and concluded that the profile for the growth of potential output assumed in the April Report remained appropriate.  The Bank expects potential output growth to trough at 1.2 per cent in 2009, and then to pick up to 1.5 per cent in 2010 and 1.9 per cent in 2011.
 
Owing to weaker-than-expected GDP growth, the amount of excess supply in the Canadian economy in the third quarter was larger than assumed in the October Report. Excess supply is expected to have started to contract in the fourth quarter, in line with the expansion in economic activity. The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap suggests that the economy was operating 3.7 per cent below its production potential in the fourth quarter of 2009. When assessing excess capacity, the Bank considers its conventional measure in conjunction with several other indicators, since there is considerable uncertainty surrounding estimates of potential output, particularly when the economy is coming out of a deep recession. In the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey , the percentage of firms reporting that they would have difficulty meeting an unanticipated increase in demand increased slightly, albeit from a very low level.
 
Recent indicators suggest that Canada's labour market has stopped deteriorating, consistent with the resumption of GDP growth. Both employment levels and average hours worked appear to have bottomed out in the summer, and the unemployment rate has been hovering around 8.5 per cent. Ongoing weakness in the labour market is nevertheless evident in the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey, in which the percentage of firms reporting labour shortages declined further, reaching its lowest level since the series began in 1998.
 
After reviewing all the indicators of capacity pressures and taking into account the weakness in potential output associated with the ongoing restructuring in the Canadian economy, the Bank judges that the economy was operating about 3 1/4 per cent below its production capacity in the fourth quarter of 2009.
 
Total CPI inflation turned positive in the fourth quarter of 2009, as had been anticipated in the October Report, as a result of year-over-year increases in energy prices. The 12-month rate of change in the total CPI bounced back to 1.0 per cent in November (from the -0.9 per cent trough reached during the summer), and is expected to have picked up further in December.
 
The core rate of inflation was 1.5 per cent in November and has been slightly stronger than expected in recent months, partly owing to larger-than-anticipated increases in property taxes and in some regulated prices. In spite of the large amount of excess supply in the economy, core inflation has remained quite close to 2 per cent since the beginning of the year. This stickiness of core inflation is likely related to the fact that wage growth had remained high relative to the underlying trend in productivity. With wage growth decelerating in recent months, the gap between the two has begun to narrow.
 
Reflecting the anticipated effects of year-over-year increases in energy prices on CPI inflation, measures of near-term inflation expectations have risen closer to the 2 per cent target in recent months. The latest Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation is 1.7 per cent for 2010. Expectations for average inflation over the next two years, as reported in the Bank's most recent Business Outlook Survey, continue to show inflation expectations concentrated within the Bank's inflation-control range. Market-based measures of inflation expectations are within historical range after adjusting for liquidity effects. Taking this and other information into account, the Bank judges that medium - and longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored to the 2 per cent inflation target.
 
Following a period of marked improvement, overall financial and credit conditions in Canada have remained fairly stable since the October Report. Canada's overall financial conditions continue to be more favourable than in most other advanced economies, as has been the case since the onset of the global financial crisis. The vast improvement in the credit conditions faced by Canadian borrowers over the past year is evident in the sharp declines in the spreads paid by households and businesses to secure funds. These spreads are assumed to be back to longer-term historical averages by early 2011.
 
Since the October Report, funding costs for Canadian banks have remained fairly flat at very low levels. Borrowing costs for households also remain at very low levels by historical standards, and household credit has continued to grow at a brisk pace, pushing the debt-to-income ratio of Canadian households to a historic peak.  Although both mortgage and consumer credit posted solid growth rates in recent months, consumer credit grew more quickly, driven mainly by draws on personal lines of credit (including home equity lines of credit).
 
Borrowing costs for Canadian businesses have also remained very low. Taken together, results from the Bank's latest Senior Loan Officer Survey and the Business Outlook Survey suggest that, following a period of substantial tightening, credit conditions for businesses eased slightly in the fourth quarter, for the first time since the global financial crisis began. However, the improvement in credit conditions mainly affected large firms, as conditions continued to tighten for some small and medium-sized firms.
 
Business credit has started to grow again, led by an increase in market-based sources of credit. Following a period of contraction that began in the second quarter, overall business credit grew by 3.7 per cent (at annual rates) in the three months to November. Bank-based business credit has continued to contract sharply since the October Report, reflecting both an improvement in the ability of firms to access capital markets for funding and the further tightening of credit conditions for some small business borrowers.
 
Narrow monetary aggregates have continued to grow briskly, reflecting the desire of both households and firms to keep money in liquid assets until it is clear that the recovery is taking hold. In the three months to November, the narrow aggregate M1+ grew at an annual rate of 15.5 per cent, whereas the broader aggregate M2++ grew at 6.6 per cent. The growth in narrow-money balances is expected to decline over time, as the economy improves.
 
The Canadian dollar has traded in a range of about 92 to 98 cents US since the October Report. Its average over this period was close to 96 cents US - the value assumed in the projection presented in the October Monetary Policy Report.
 
Canadian monetary and fiscal policies continue to provide needed stimulus to the economy. On 8 December 2009 and 19 January 2010, the Bank of Canada maintained its target for the overnight interest rate at 1/4 per cent - the effective lower bound for this target rate - and reaffirmed its commitment, conditional on the inflation outlook, to hold the policy rate at that level until the end of the second quarter of 2010.
 
The Bank's base-case projection incorporates the following key assumptions: a Canada/US exchange rate averaging 96 cents US; energy prices in line with recent futures prices; prices for non-energy commodities increasing progressively as the global economy recovers; and global credit conditions continuing to gradually improve.
 
The outlook for the Canadian economy is very similar to that presented in the October Report, with the economy projected to return to full capacity in the third quarter of 2011. Following weaker-than-expected real GDP growth in the third quarter of 2009, the Bank projects that, beginning around mid-year and continuing into early 2011, growth will be slightly stronger than expected in October. This upward revision reflects a stronger global economy and the Bank's view that the import surge in the third quarter was partly the result of temporary factors. On an average annual basis, the economy is now projected to grow by 2.9 per cent in 2010 and 3.5 per cent in 2011, after having contracted by an estimated 2.5 per cent in 2009.
 
Consumer spending is expected to grow at a solid pace throughout the projection horizon, supported by improved consumer confidence, higher wealth, monetary stimulus, and the recovery in the growth of labour income. The personal savings rate is expected to begin to moderate as households unwind some of the precautionary savings they built up during the recession.
 
Following a period of vigorous growth, housing investment is projected to slow through 2010 as pent-up demand subsides and affordability declines.
 
Business fixed investment is expected to recover in 2010 with the improvement in financial conditions and economic activity, as well as higher commodity prices. This projected increase in investment spending is consistent with the results of the Bank's recent Business Outlook Survey.
 
Export volumes are expected to continue to recover over the projection period in response to growing external demand and higher commodity prices. Export growth is projected to be somewhat stronger than was expected last October, owing to a more favourable outlook for the US economy, particularly in the sectors that figure most importantly for Canadian exporters. The persistent strength in the Canadian dollar and the absolute low level of US demand will, however, continue to dampen exports. Import volumes are also projected to grow at a solid pace, in line with the recovery in domestic demand, the rebound in exports, and the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
 
Economic growth is expected to become more solidly entrenched over the projection period as self-sustaining growth in private demand takes hold. The contribution of government spending to growth in domestic demand is expected to have peaked at about 2 percentage points in the last quarter of 2009, and then to gradually decline through 2010 before turning negative in 2011.
 
As the recovery in the Canadian economy continues, excess supply will gradually be absorbed. The economy is expected to reach its production capacity in the third quarter of 2011, as projected in the October Report.
 
Measured CPI inflation in Canada is expected to be slightly higher this year than projected in the October Report, reflecting the positive surprise to core inflation in the fourth quarter of last year.
 
On the costs side, the Bank expects that wage growth over the projection period will remain at recent more moderate levels, compared with the first half of 2009.
 
In the near term, core inflation is projected to remain fairly steady as the effect of the recent slowing in wage growth is largely offset by that of the gradual absorption of excess supply. As the impact of the first factor dissipates, and with inflation expectations well anchored, the core rate is projected to increase gradually, returning to 2 per cent in the third quarter of 2011.
 
With the base-year effects for gasoline prices dropping out of the data last December, total CPI inflation is projected to follow a path very similar to that of the core rate throughout the projection horizon. Total CPI inflation is also expected to return to the 2 per cent target in the third quarter of 2011.
 
The uncertainty surrounding the Bank's inflation projection is illustrated using fan charts. Chart 18 and Chart 19 depict the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core and total CPI inflation from the first quarter of 2010 to the end of 2011.  In particular, they show the slight downward tilt to the confidence bands that results from monetary policy operating at the effective lower bound.
 
The main risks to the outlook for inflation are those identified in the October Monetary Policy Report. Risks remain elevated, although they have continued to diminish gradually with the consolidation of the recovery in the global and Canadian economies.
 
The main upside risks to inflation are associated with the possibility of a stronger-than-anticipated global recovery. The Bank expects the recovery to be more protracted than in previous recessions, owing to the persistent effects of the financial crisis on credit markets and on household savings behaviour in many advanced economies. It is thus possible that the recovery in global demand could be more vigorous than projected, resulting in stronger external demand for Canadian exports. This could occur, for instance, in the event of unexpectedly rapid improvements in financial conditions and consumer confidence. A related risk is that Canadian domestic demand could be more robust than projected.
 
On the downside, there is the risk that persistent strength of the Canadian dollar could act as a significant further drag on growth and put additional downward pressure on inflation. Another important downside risk is that the global recovery could be even more protracted than projected. Growth is heavily dependent on the exceptional monetary and fiscal policy stimulus provided worldwide, as well as the extraordinary measures taken to support financial systems in many advanced countries. Self-sustaining growth in private demand, which will be required for a solid recovery, may take longer than expected to materialize.
 
While the Bank judges that these underlying macroeconomic risks are roughly balanced, the overall risks to the inflation projection are tilted slightly to the downside as a result of monetary policy operating at the effective lower bound. The reason for this tilt is that the Bank could respond with conventional monetary tightening in the event that upside risks materialized. In contrast, if downside risks materialized, the Bank would have to implement unconventional policies, for which greater prudence would be warranted.
 
Over the medium term, global macroeconomic imbalances continue to pose significant risks to the outlook. These imbalances have been attenuated during the recession, as US households have curtailed their spending, while domestic demand in Asian emerging-market economies has been boosted by aggressive policy measures. Sustained improvement over the medium term will require fiscal consolidation in the United States and several other advanced countries, together with policy-induced domestic demand growth and real exchange rate adjustment for surplus countries. In the absence of these conditions, large imbalances may re-emerge, with the attendant risk of disorderly adjustment.