Global economic growth remains solid, with the US economy showing particular strength. The Bank estimates that growth in US real gross domestic product in the first half of 2018 was even stronger than expected in the April Monetary Policy Report. In other advanced economies, economic growth is projected to pick up following temporary softness in the first quarter, but with less momentum than anticipated in April. Higher oil prices are expected to have a slightly negative net effect on global growth, with the impact varying across regions. The Bank expects the global economy will grow by about 3 3/4 per cent in 2018 before settling at around 3 1/2 per cent in 2019, similar to the April projection.
 
Escalating trade tensions pose considerable risks to the outlook. The projection incorporates actions taken since April by the United States to end exemptions on steel and aluminum tariffs for some of its largest trading partners and to implement previously announced tariffs on China. It also accounts for the ensuing countermeasures. More broadly, this escalation has heightened concerns about a more pronounced shift away from a multilateral, rules-based trading system. These concerns could dampen the outlook for global trade and investment growth. In response to these developments, the Bank's base case now includes the measures that have already been implemented. It also considers somewhat greater adverse effects from uncertainty on investment, both globally and in North America. The actions and uncertainty effects are assumed to reduce the level of global GDP by 0.2 per cent by the end of 2020.
 
Bond yields remain higher than in 2017 in some regions, reflecting actual and expected changes in monetary policy. Monetary policy normalization is occurring from different starting points and at different speeds. The European Central Bank has announced the conditional conclusion of its asset purchase program (quantitative easing) by the end of December 2018. The economic expansion in the United States is further along than it is in other advanced economies and is receiving a sizable boost from fiscal policy. The US Federal Reserve has continued to withdraw monetary stimulus, and markets are now expecting a faster pace of increases in the federal funds rate. Positive market sentiment about the near-term US outlook has also contributed to an appreciation of the US dollar and portfolio outflows from emerging-market economies , exacerbating country specific vulnerabilities. Equity prices have become more sensitive to trade policy developments. Overall, despite recent movements, global financial conditions are supportive of economic activity.
 
The US economy has been expanding at a solid pace, with recent data signalling more momentum than anticipated in the April Report. Net exports have been unexpectedly robust, reflecting transitory factors, and business investment has been more solid than expected. Job gains continue to be elevated amid a tight labour market, and indicators of consumer sentiment remain high.
 
The US economy is forecast to expand by 3 per cent in 2018 and 2 1/2 per cent in 2019, well above the estimated rate of its potential output growth. Con­sumption is anticipated to rise at a healthy pace, underpinned by strong employment growth, past income tax cuts and elevated household net worth. Solid private demand and corporate tax cuts should drive robust business investment growth. GDP growth is projected to ease to around 2 per cent in 2020, close to potential output growth, as fiscal and monetary policy support diminishes.
 
US businesses are starting to report that trade policy uncertainty is dampening an otherwise upbeat outlook for investment, although this is not yet evident in the data. The current base-case projection for the US economy therefore incorporates some modest adverse effects of trade policy uncertainty on investment.
 
US core inflation has firmed as the effects of transitory factors, including past declines in telecommunication prices, have passed. Wage growth has been modest but is expected to pick up with a tightening labour market. With stronger wage growth and support from excess demand, core inflation is forecast to remain close to the Federal Reserve's inflation target of 2 per cent.
 

Growth in the euro area softened at the start of the year, partly reflecting labour strikes and some weakness in exports. Recent indicators have been mixed, but solid fundamentals will likely support a rebound in the second quarter. Growth is expected to slow from 2 1/4 per cent in 2018 to about 1 1/2 per cent in 2019 and 2020, close to the rate of potential output growth, as monetary policy becomes less accommodative. Inflation in the euro area remains tepid and is anticipated to rise only gradually. Political developments have renewed market concerns over fiscal sustainability in the euro area, at the same time that uncertainty from trade policy has increased.
 
Overall the growth outlook for EMEs remains strong. EMEs have generally become more resilient to stress over the past several years. However, both Argentina and Turkey have come under acute financial stress since April. These developments appear to be related to elevated debt levels and weaknesses in their monetary policy frameworks. Growth in oil-importing EMEs is forecast to be around 4 1/4 per cent over the projection. Growth in oil exporting EMEs is expected to rise as they benefit from higher oil prices.
 
China's GDP growth in the first quarter of this year was slower than expected in April, largely reflecting a temporary surge in import growth. This surge was due, in part, to stock building. While imports have remained strong, recent indicators point to a solid rebound in GDP growth. Authorities have eased monetary policy to help offset downside risks from a slowdown in the pace of credit growth and from trade policy developments that could weigh on investor sentiment. Economic growth is still anticipated to moderate from around 6 1/2 per cent in 2018 to around 6 per cent in 2020, as part of the continued transition to more sustainable growth.
 

Crude oil prices have been averaging about 15 per cent higher than assumed in the April Report. The increase in prices was partly driven by unplanned output declines in Venezuela and sanctions on exports from Iran, in a market where demand growth has been healthy and excess inventories are being drawn down. US shale drilling has also expanded by less than anticipated, reflecting higher costs and pipeline bottlenecks.
 
Risks to global oil prices are roughly balanced at current price levels. An important upside risk is that there could be further disruptions in oil supply from Iran and Venezuela. In contrast, production by members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries could increase faster than expected as the previous agreement to reduce output expires. The possibility that US shale productivity growth could be stronger than expected provides another downside risk to prices. The spreads between West Texas Intermediate and Western Canada Select and between Brent and WTI have narrowed recently due to temporary factors. These spreads are expected to widen again because of transportation bottlenecks. The Bank's convention is to assume that oil prices stay at their recent average levels over the projection horizon.
 
The Bank's non-energy commodity price index is relatively unchanged since April. The prices received by Canadian lumber producers remain high, despite the duties imposed by the United States last year, partly as a result of brisk US home building. Base metal prices have recently declined as a result of the escalation in global trade tensions and market concerns over risks to GDP growth in China.
 
Many commodity-exporting economies, including Canada, have recently seen their currencies depreciate despite the rise in oil prices. The typical exchange rate appreciation associated with improving terms of trade is being offset by the combined effects of the broad-based appreciation of the US dollar and of rising trade tensions. Trade developments are important for these countries, given their considerable reliance on open trade and global economic growth. In this context, the Canadian dollar is assumed to remain close to its recent average of 76 cents US, compared with 78 cents US in April.
 

The Canadian economy continues to operate close to full capacity, and GDP is expected to expand somewhat faster than potential. The composition of growth is shifting: the contribution from household spending is expected to be smaller than in 2017 while that from exports and business investment is anticipated to be larger.
 
In the Bank's projection, economic activity will be supported by continuing solid foreign demand and accommodative financial conditions. While investment and trade are projected to expand, they are being restrained by the US tariffs recently imposed on Canadian steel and aluminum imports and by uncertainty around trade policies. Since April, uncertainty has increased, reflecting delays in the progress of renegotiations of the North American Free Trade Agreement, as well as the broadening and unknown duration of tariffs.
 
Real GDP growth is projected to average 2.0 per cent over 2018 to 2020, similar to the outlook in the April Report. In the first quarter of 2018, business investment and exports were more robust than anticipated. Stronger levels of spending are expected to persist over the projection horizon, partly reflecting higher oil prices, even with the larger impacts from both trade policy uncertainty and tariffs.
 
Consumer price index inflation has hovered around 2.2 per cent recently. It is expected to reach 2.5 per cent in the third and fourth quarters before returning to close to 2 per cent in the second half of 2019 as the effects of temporary factors fade. Given the importance of temporary factors, it is useful to look at the Bank's measures of core inflation. These measures remain near 2 per cent, consistent with an economy operating close to capacity.
 
The economy is expected to grow somewhat above its potential in the near term. As anticipated, growth was a modest 1.3 per cent in the first quarter and is expected to average about 2 per cent over the second and third quarters.
 
The composition of growth has begun to shift away from household spending toward business investment and exports. This shift is occurring as households adjust to higher interest rates and tighter mortgage rules (Guideline B-20). Growth of household credit has continued to slow and is now below the growth rate of household income; as a result, the ratio of household debt to disposable income is edging down. Consumption growth has been slowing since the middle of 2017, led by a pullback in spending on components sensitive to interest rates. While Guideline B-20 is improving the credit quality of new mortgages, its announcement and adoption led to a pull forward of housing resales into the fourth quarter of 2017, followed by a sharp drop in the first few months of 2018. As a result, residential investment in the first half of 2018 likely contracted. A partial rebound in resales is expected in the third quarter.
 
Meanwhile, firms are expanding their capacity in the face of solid demand. The Bank estimates that business investment and exports were stronger in the first half of 2018 than anticipated in the April Report. Spending on computer equipment, software, and research and development was particularly robust. Because the strength of export growth in the first two quarters mainly reflected a faster-than-expected rebound in oil exports after temporary pipeline shutdowns in late 2017, export growth in the third quarter is expected to slow.
 
The Bank judges that the output gap in the second quarter of 2018 was between -0.5 and +0.5 per cent. The Bank has revised its estimates of potential output up modestly since April to reflect a higher level of investment from the first quarter of 2018 through the projection horizon. Investment could grow faster than anticipated in the base-case projection, further raising potential output.
 
Labour market conditions remain healthy, but growth of employment and average hours worked has slowed from last year's strong pace. Likewise, after declining notably in 2017, the unemployment rate to date this year has remained relatively steady, near its 40-year low. Firms reported in the summer Business Outlook Survey that capacity pressures and labour shortages have intensified. Nevertheless, there are areas where labour market slack remains—especially in the energy-producing regions. The recent uptick in the labour force participation rate indicates that additional people may be willing to work. As well, the long-term unemployment rate is still relatively high, and the participation rate in the youth labour market remains subdued. Against this backdrop, underlying wage growth remains close to 2.3 per cent, indicating less wage pressure than would be expected in a labour market with no slack.
 
Consistent with an economy operating near potential, core inflation measures remain close to 2 per cent. CPI inflation is slightly above 2 per cent, mainly reflecting temporary upward pressures from increases in gasoline prices and in the prices of services affected by recent rises in minimum wages.
 
The Bank expects that GDP will grow somewhat faster than potential output over the projection horizon. Consumption should be supported by solid gains in real gross domestic income. The combined contribution to growth of exports and investment will continue to be better than in recent years, even after incorporating the restraining effects of the US tariffs and the Canadian countermeasures. Growth of government spending is projected to slow in 2019 and 2020 relative to the previous two years as the effects of the 2016 federal budget stimulus gradually dissipate.
 
Following the Bank's recent practice, the base-case projection incorporates the impact of trade policy uncertainty, as well as the effects of implemented tariffs. These tariffs include previously imposed US tariffs on Canadian softwood lumber and newsprint, the new US tariffs on steel and aluminum imports from Canada, and Canadian countermeasures. The dampening effects associated with trade policy uncertainty and the implemented US tariffs subtract about 2/3 per cent from the level of GDP by the end of 2020. While this drag is larger than in the April Report, the incremental drag on projected GDP roughly balances the positive impact of higher oil prices.
 
Consumer spending is expected to provide less support to GDP growth than in 2017. The contribution of residential investment is expected to be small in 2018 and to subsequently decline. The decline is driven by tighter mortgage rules and higher interest rates.
 
The sensitivity of consumption and housing to interest rates is estimated to be larger than in past cycles, given the elevated ratio of household debt to disposable income. The impact of higher interest rates likely differs across categories of borrowers, with highly indebted households the most affected.
 
Consumption growth is expected to be supported by a pickup in wage growth and an improvement in Canada's terms of trade resulting from higher oil prices. However, growth in consumer spending is anticipated to be tempered by a modest slowdown in the growth of total hours worked and by the revisions to mortgage rules. The revised rules may prompt some households to save more so that they can pass the tighter mortgage stress tests.
 
Residential investment is slowing, reflecting the effects of higher interest rates and tighter mortgage rules. Resale activity contracted when the revised measures went into effect but is anticipated to improve over the next few quarters. Data on resale activity and housing starts suggest that the housing market is beginning to stabilize. Growth of new construction spending is expected to slow over the projection horizon. The new mortgage measures may cause households to purchase less-expensive residences because typical homebuyers are now more constrained in how much they can borrow.
 
Business investment is expected to expand at a modest pace following the strong growth observed since the beginning of 2017. Firms in all regions expect capacity pressures to intensify. However, exporting firms and their domestic suppliers are anticipated to delay or reduce investment spending because of increasing trade policy uncertainty.
 
In many sectors, moderate investment growth is expected as firms anticipating solid growth in domestic and foreign demand and capacity pressures increase their capital expenditures. Capacity utilization rates have been rising and are near post-2003 highs in many industries.
 
In the mining, oil and gas sector, higher prices should provide an incentive to increase investment. Sentiment has been improving with the higher oil prices and indications of progress toward addressing shortages of pipeline capacity. However, with transportation constraints persisting for oil in Western Canada, spending to expand production is expected to be restrained in the near term.
 
Export growth is expected to increase over the projection horizon, supported mainly by solid foreign demand growth and higher oil prices. The outlook would have been stronger were it not for the recently imposed tariffs and increased uncertainty associated with global trade policies. Growth prospects differ across sectors, in part because of the varying intensity of capacity constraints faced by firms.
 
Tariffs imposed by the US administration on imports of steel and aluminum from Canada are expected to subtract about 0.6 per cent from Canadian exports. Likewise, tariffs imposed by Canada on certain products imported from the United States are expected to subtract 0.6 per cent from Canadian imports.
 
Buoyed by strong foreign demand, sectors that are planning to increase capital expenditures to expand capacity or innovate, such as machinery manufacturing and services, are expected to boost their exports. Some sectors will likely continue to face capacity constraints. Exports of many commodities, for example, are currently limited by transportation bottlenecks due to rail car shortages. These shortages are expected to abate over the coming year. Food manufacturing is also struggling with physical capacity issues, while difficulties recruiting skilled labour are more frequently reported by firms specializing in information and technology, industrial machinery, equipment and parts, and research and development.
 
The Bank continues to assume that competitiveness challenges will restrain export growth over the forecast horizon. This follows losses of competitiveness in recent years that were experienced in all categories of non-energy exports.
 
Growth of imports is expected to slow over the projection horizon, consistent with the moderation in the growth rate of final domestic demand and the tariffs imposed by Canada on certain US products.
 
CPI inflation is projected to rise temporarily, reaching 2.5 per cent in the third and fourth quarters of 2018 before returning to about 2 per cent. Inflation is expected to be higher than 2 per cent owing to higher gasoline prices in recent months, the impact of minimum wage increases, newly imposed tariffs and exchange rate pass-through. The Bank estimates that tariffs levied by Canada on some products imported from the United States will temporarily boost inflation by about 0.1 percentage point. Once prices have fully adjusted to incorporate the effects of these factors, the associated upward pressures on inflation will fade. Low food price inflation is expected to have a negative effect on CPI inflation until the first half of 2019. CPI inflation is expected to be close to 2 per cent from mid-2019 through the end of the projection horizon.
 
The base-case projection provides the Bank's view of the most likely outcome for inflation. Any projection is subject to considerable forecast uncertainty. A 90 per cent confidence band around the inflation projection widens from ±0.6 percentage points in the third quarter of 2018 to ±1.5 percentage points by the end of 2020.
 
The projection is consistent with medium- and long-term inflation expectations remaining well anchored. Most respondents to the summer Business Outlook Survey anticipate that inflation will remain within the Bank's target range of 1 to 3 per cent over the next two years. The majority expect inflation to be in the upper half of that range, consistent with the Bank's projection. The June 2018 Consensus Economics forecast for CPI inflation is 2.3 per cent in 2018 and 2.0 per cent in 2019, with long-term annual inflation expectations averaging 2.0 per cent through 2028.
 

The ongoing shift toward protectionist global trade policies remains the most important source of uncertainty surrounding the outlook. Related risks have broadened and intensified, although some aspects of these risks have been partially realized with the imposition of tariffs by the US administration and countermeasures by other countries. With respect to bilateral trade arrangements between the United States and Canada, the base-case projection incorporates the effects of the US tariffs on steel and aluminum imports from Canada and Canadian countermeasures. It also incorporates the effects of previously imposed US tariffs on Canadian softwood lumber and newsprint and those of trade policy uncertainty.
 
It is impossible to fully quantify the possible outcomes associated with changing trade policies without clarity about the actual measures and their timing. The range of possibilities is wide, and the channels through which the measures would affect the economy are complex.
 
In this context, the Bank assesses that the risks to the projected path for inflation are roughly balanced. As in past reports, the focus is on a selection of risks identified as the most important for the projected path for inflation, drawing from a larger set of risks accounted for in the projection. The evolution of risks since April is summarized in Table 5. The risk of weaker Canadian exports and investment has intensified since April.
 
A broadening of US tariffs could pose a significant risk to Canadian economic activity. While the primary channel for such trade policy actions would be through reduced exports and imports, additional channels of transmission could be important. For industries that comprise a relatively large share of Canadian exports and with highly integrated cross-border supply chains, such as the auto sector, tariffs would have large impacts on investment and employment. Adverse effects on business and consumer confidence could lead to large negative spillovers on household spending and on business investment in other sectors of the economy. Moreover, an overall reduction in investment and dislocation of global value chains would have negative effects on productivity and potential growth. These effects would be mitigated by a depreciation of the Canadian dollar and possibly by government measures to support affected industries and workers. The direct effect of tariffs and exchange rate pass-through would immediately result in higher prices for some goods and reduce consumer purchasing power. In an economy already operating at capacity, this could lead to demands for higher wage increases and, in turn, put upward pressure on prices. In addition, there are two-sided effects associated with the demand and supply implications of the tariffs. Weaker aggregate demand would weigh on price inflation, although reductions to potential output would work in the opposite direction.
 
Global financial conditions remain broadly accommodative, but could tighten suddenly. Further escalation of trade tensions, a faster than anticipated pickup in wage and price inflation, or significant increases in expectations of the future path of monetary policy could lead to higher term premiums and equity risk premiums. If premiums were to rise, the higher bond yields could increase capital outflows from EMEs, exacerbating country-specific vulnerabilities in some cases, and financial conditions could tighten further. These developments could translate into a decline in activity in sectors sensitive to interest rates, a rise in debt-service burdens, weaker global and Canadian growth, and a decline in commodity prices.
 
The outlook for US GDP growth in 2018 has been revised up following signs in recent data of greater-than-expected strength. However, growth over the projection horizon could be stronger if trade-related uncertainty diminishes or tax reform and deregulation trigger animal spirits. The resulting boost to investment, as well as stronger household spending, would have positive implications for Canadian investment and exports.
 
While consumption has been weaker than expected in the first quarter of 2018, persistently elevated consumer confidence could lead to even stronger consumer spending, with a savings rate that falls below the relatively high level embedded in the projection. The vulnerabilities associated with household indebtedness would be exacerbated if the additional spending were financed by more borrowing.
 
While there has been some moderation in price growth and less speculative demand in the single-family home segment, prices for condominiums have continued to increase rapidly in some markets. Thus, there remains a risk of a sharp decline in house prices in overheated markets, which would likely dampen residential investment and consumption.