As anticipated in January, the global economic recovery is becoming more firmly entrenched and is expected to continue at a steady pace. In the United States, growth is solidifying, although consolidation of household and ultimately government balance sheets will limit the pace of the expansion. European growth has strengthened, despite ongoing sovereign debt and banking challenges in the periphery. The disasters that struck Japan in March will severely affect its economic activity in the first half of this year and create short-­term disruptions to supply chains in advanced economies. Robust demand from emerging­-market economies is driving the underlying strength in commodity prices, which is being further reinforced by supply shocks arising from recent geopolitical events. These price increases, combined with persistent excess demand conditions in major emerging-­market economies, are contributing to the emergence of broader global inflationary pressures. Despite the significant challenges that weigh on the global outlook, global financial conditions remain very stimulative and investors have become noticeably less risk averse.
 
Although recent economic activity in Canada has been stronger than the Bank had anticipated, the profile is largely consistent with the underlying dynamics outlined in January. Aggregate demand is rebalancing toward business investment and net exports, and away from government and household expenditures. As in January, the Bank expects business investment to continue to rise rapidly and the growth of consumer spending to evolve broadly in line with that of personal disposable income, although higher terms of trade and wealth are likely to support a slightly stronger profile for household expenditures than previously projected. In contrast, the improvement in net exports is expected to be further restrained by ongoing competitiveness challenges, which have been reinforced by the recent strength of the Canadian dollar.
 
Overall, the Bank projects that the economy will expand by 2.9 per cent in 2011 and 2.6 per cent in 2012. Growth in 2013 is expected to equal that of potential output, at 2.1 per cent. The Bank expects that the economy will return to capacity in the middle of 2012, two quarters earlier than had been projected in January.
 
While underlying inflation is subdued, a number of temporary factors will boost total CPI inflation to around 3 per cent in the second quarter of 2011 before total CPI inflation converges to the 2 per cent target by the middle of 2012. This short-­term volatility reflects the impact of recent sharp increases in energy prices and the ongoing boost from changes in provincial indirect taxes. Core inflation has fallen further in recent months, in part due to temporary factors. It is expected to rise gradually to 2 per cent by the middle of 2012 as excess supply in the economy is slowly absorbed, labour compensation growth stays modest, productivity recovers and inflation expectations remain well­-anchored.
 
The persistent strength of the Canadian dollar could create even greater headwinds for the Canadian economy, putting additional downward pressure on inflation through weaker­ than ­expected net exports and larger declines in import prices.
 
Although the global economic recovery is expected to continue at a steady pace, global risks remain elevated. The two main upside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the possibility of higher­ than ­projected commodity prices and global inflation, and increased momentum in Canadian household spending. The two main downside risks to inflation relate to headwinds from the persistent strength in the Canadian dollar and the possibility that growth in household spending could be weaker than projected.
 
Overall, the Bank judges the risks to the inflation outlook in Canada are roughly balanced over the projection horizon.
 
Reflecting all of these factors, on 12 April 2011 the Bank decided to maintain the target for the overnight rate at 1 per cent. The Bank Rate is correspondingly 1 1/4 per cent and the deposit rate is 3/4 per cent. This leaves consider­ able monetary stimulus in place, consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target in an environment of material excess supply in Canada. Any further reduction in monetary policy stimulus would need to be carefully considered.
 
The global economic recovery is becoming more firmly entrenched and is evolving broadly in line with the Bank's projection in the January Monetary Policy Report. In advanced economies, the hand-off from public to private demand is proceeding gradually, while growth in emerging-market countries remains vigorous. Commodity prices have surged since the autumn in response to strong demand, especially from emerging Asia, and have been boosted further more recently by a series of supply disruptions and geopolitical events. Increasing prices for food and energy, combined with persistent excess demand conditions, are exacerbating already elevated inflationary pressures in several emerging-market economies.
 
Global financial conditions have remained very stimulative, and investors have become noticeably less risk averse, despite the significant challenges that weigh on the global economic outlook. Ongoing efforts to repair household, bank and sovereign balance sheets continue to dampen growth in many advanced economies, and rising commodity prices are leading to higher headline inflation at a time when the recovery still requires considerable policy support. While core European economies have performed somewhat better than expected, some peripheral countries are facing severe banking and sovereign vulnerabilities that could have broader spillover effects within Europe. Geopolitical tensions in North Africa and the Middle East and the evolving situation in Japan following the devastating earthquake on 11 March are also contributing to global uncertainty.
 
Developments since the January Report point to firming demand in the major advanced economies and continued robust growth in emerging-market countries. In the United States, real GDP has exceeded its pre-crisis level, supported by continued fiscal and monetary stimulus. Activity has also strengthened in the euro area. In Japan, economic indicators were relatively solid before the Tohoku earthquake caused major destruction and disruptions to the economy. Emerging-market economies remain the main drivers of global economic growth.
 
Real GDP in the United States increased by 3.1 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2010. This result was weaker than anticipated in the January Report, owing to a substantially smaller contribution from inventories. Growth in real GDP appears to have decelerated in the first quarter, mainly as a result of weaker consumption growth. Despite recent improvements in the labour market, the level of employment is far below its previous peak, and long-term joblessness is at historically high levels.
 
Since the beginning of the year, US consumption has been underpinned by fiscal stimulus and more favourable financial positions. Household borrowing conditions have improved, debt-servicing costs have declined and higher equity prices have provided support to household wealth. Savings rates have remained elevated, consistent with the need for further deleveraging and balance-sheet repair.
 
The US housing market is acutely challenged. Housing demand remains very weak, constrained by soft labour market conditions and elevated uncertainty about future real estate values. Non-residential construction has also been soft.
 
Growth in US economic activity has been supported by continued solid growth in investment in machinery and equipment and a rebound in exports. Investment in equipment and software has been underpinned by strong corporate balance sheets and improved market financing conditions, while the strength in exports has been driven by the recovery in global demand, a depreciation of the US dollar and strong productivity growth.
 
In the euro area, real GDP grew modestly in the fourth quarter of 2010 as bad weather disrupted activities in the construction sector. Indicators for the first quarter point to a rebound in growth, especially in the core economies, as a result of stronger domestic demand and continued solid increases in exports. Economic fundamentals in the peripheral economies remain much weaker than in the core countries, reflecting the increased drag from fiscal austerity measures and ongoing concerns about sovereign debt levels and bank balance sheets. In Germany, the unemployment rate stands at its lowest level in the past two decades, while unemployment rates in Spain and Greece are at, or near, record highs.
 
Real GDP in Japan declined in the fourth quarter of 2010, reflecting in part the expiration of tax incentives. Growth had resumed in the first two months of 2011, before the disruptions caused by recent events led to severe output losses that will persist in coming quarters.
 
Economic growth in China has continued to surprise on the upside, and there are signs of overheating. Inflationary pressures are rising, real estate investment is exceptionally strong, and concerns over elevated property prices and excessive liquidity are mounting. Authorities have taken additional measures over the past three months in an effort to suppress these price pressures. They have raised the reserve requirement ratio for financial institutions by a total of 100 basis points, bringing it to 20 per cent for large institutions, and have increased the benchmark one-year deposit rate by 50 basis points to 3.25 per cent.  However, with inflation close to 5 per cent on a year-over-year basis, real interest rates in China are still negative. Credit is growing by close to 20 per cent on a year-over-year basis.
 
Global commodity prices are elevated, driven by strong demand and a series of supply shocks. Prices for 18 of the 23 main components of the Bank of Canada's commodity price index are above their real long-term averages. Crude oil prices have surged in response to the unrest in North Africa and the Middle East, and prices for many non-energy commodities have reached record highs. Much of the increased demand for energy in recent years has come from emerging-market economies, principally those in Asia. Agricultural prices have also been boosted by strong demand from emerging Asia and, more recently, by adverse weather conditions, pushing them to new record highs. Metals prices are also hovering near record highs, supported by robust demand from China and a shortage of global mining capacity.
 
The rise in commodity prices has pushed up total inflation in both advanced and emerging-market economies. These effects are expected to persist in 2011. Inflationary pressures are building particularly rapidly in emerging-market economies, reflecting the large share of food items in their CPI basket, their energy-intensive production processes and excess demand conditions more generally. While policy-makers in many emerging-market economies have responded by raising interest rates and applying other restrictive measures, monetary policy in many of these countries remains very accommodative. In most advanced economies, policy rates have stayed at or near historic lows as a result of excess supply conditions and subdued underlying inflation pressures. However, owing to the effects of increasing commodity prices, policy-makers in some advanced countries now face the challenge of rising headline inflation at a time when unemployment rates remain high and excess capacity persists.
 
Conditions in global financial markets continue to be very stimulative, although volatility has risen recently. Government bond yields in major advanced economies are little changed from their levels at the time of the January Report and remain very low by historical standards. Concerns over the potential effects of growing tensions in North Africa and the Middle East and the impact of the earthquake and nuclear crisis in Japan have been counterbalanced by increased optimism about the outlook for global growth and rising investor confidence. Worries nevertheless persist about the high debt levels of some European sovereigns and the state of their banking sectors. There is increased differentiation in European debt markets, with some borrowers effectively shut out. To date, there has been little spillover into other European countries.
 
Corporate credit markets in advanced economies continue to experience strong demand, with credit spreads narrowing further and corporate bond issuance reaching new highs. Interest rates on high-yield corporate debt issued in US dollars are currently at an all-time low, reflecting robust demand and an increased appetite for risk. Equity prices have also risen in advanced economies since the January Report, in some cases breaching previous peaks, but are basically unchanged in emerging-market countries.
 
Many emerging-market economies have experienced strong upward pressure on their currencies, reflecting both their strong economic performance and their positive interest rate differentials with respect to advanced countries. The required adjustment in real exchange rates is being delayed, however, through increased use of intervention and capital controls.
 
The global economic recovery is projected to proceed at a steady pace over 2011-13, largely as expected in the January Report.  Growth in private domestic demand in advanced economies is expected to broaden over the projection horizon. Robust demand from emerging-market economies is driving the underlying strength in commodity prices, which is being further reinforced by supply shocks arising from recent geopolitical events. These price increases, combined with persistent excess demand conditions in major emerging-market economies, are contributing to the emergence of broader global inflationary pressures.
 
US real GDP is expected to grow by roughly 3 per cent through 2013, a marginally lower profile for growth than in the January Report. A gradual strengthening and broadening of private demand is expected to support the US economic expansion over the projection horizon. Higher energy prices are projected to slightly reduce the pace of household expenditure growth. Fiscal policy will continue to be an important driver of growth in 2011, but will become a net drag in 2012 as fiscal consolidation takes hold.
 
Gradually improving conditions in labour markets are expected to sustain the growth of US consumption over the projection horizon, in spite of the dampening effects of higher oil prices and the ongoing rebuilding of household balance sheets. Temporary tax reductions that were announced late last year will also provide a significant boost to consumption in 2011.
 
Business investment in equipment and software is projected to grow solidly through 2013, driven by the low cost of capital, firms' healthy balance sheets and the overall improvement in economic conditions. In contrast, only a modest recovery in the construction of new homes and non-residential structures is anticipated over the projection horizon.
 
Along with the sustained recovery in private demand, net exports are expected to provide increasing support to US economic growth over the projection horizon, owing to strong external demand for US goods and services.
 
In the euro area, real GDP is expected to increase by about 1.8 per cent on an average annual basis through 2011-12. Growth in domestic demand will be constrained by the effects of fiscal consolidation, lingering concerns about public finances in the peripheral countries and higher oil prices. However, net exports are projected to contribute significantly to growth in economic activity, supported by robust demand in China and other trading partners. In 2013, real GDP growth is expected to rise to 2.3 per cent as the important drag from fiscal austerity measures starts to fade.
 
Growth is projected to slow markedly in Japan in 2011, reflecting the unwinding of fiscal incentives, the earlier appreciation of the yen and the drop in output stemming from the damage caused by the earthquake. Growth in the Japanese economy in 2011 has been reduced to 0.8 per cent in the Bank's latest projection. Over 2012-13, growth is expected to recover, owing to reconstruction activity, as well as a gradual strengthening in private demand, supported by improving labour market conditions.
 
In China, further monetary and credit tightening and higher commodity prices are projected to moderate growth over 2011-13. A modest rotation of domestic demand toward consumption and away from investment is anticipated, facilitated by the introduction of new structural policy measures that should lessen the need for precautionary savings.  Growth in net exports is expected to slow over the projection period in response to an appreciation of the Chinese real effective exchange rate.
 
Growth in other emerging-market economies is also projected to moderate through 2013, in response to the somewhat slower growth in China, the unwinding of the fiscal stimulus introduced during the recession, tighter monetary policy in reaction to heightened inflationary pressures and an anticipated modest appreciation of their real exchange rates.
 
The Bank of Canada's commodity price index is expected to remain above the levels anticipated in the January Report, owing to higher prices for oil and non-energy commodities. Based on the latest futures curve, West Texas Intermediate oil prices are projected to remain in the US$103 to $109 range. Natural gas prices, as suggested by the latest futures curve, are projected to rise modestly, as demand shifts away from oil toward other energy sources. Prices are nevertheless expected to remain low relative to their historical relationship with oil prices over the projection horizon, with the excess supply from shale production helping to contain price increases. Prices for non-energy commodities are anticipated to increase moderately over the rest of 2011, reflecting the lingering effects of tight supply conditions on the prices of metals and agricultural products. Thereafter, the prices of non-energy commodities are expected to decline in response to a gradual increase in metals production, the normalization of crop yields and some deceleration in demand from emerging-market economies.
 
The Bank's base-case scenario suggests that global imbalances will remain large through 2013. Although actions taken by some emerging-market authorities to limit the nominal appreciation of their exchange rates will delay the resolution of these imbalances, rising inflation rates in some of these countries are pushing their real exchange rates higher. In the United States, the anticipated fiscal consolidation should lead to increased national savings, but the negative effect of higher oil prices on the terms of trade is expected to delay the improvement in the current account balance. Elevated commodity prices, in contrast, should strengthen the current account balances of commodity-producing countries, which, as a group, already enjoy a large current account surplus.
 
Economic activity in Canada has been stronger in recent quarters than the Bank had expected in the January Report. A more modest pace of growth is projected in the period ahead, reflecting the broad economic forces identified in the January Report. The expected rebalancing of aggregate demand in Canada has begun, with investment picking up strongly and contributions to growth from government expenditures scheduled to fade. Household spending has shown greater-than-expected momentum in recent quarters. The Bank continues to expect growth in consumption and residential investment to slow over the projection horizon, although the supportive effects of higher terms of trade on incomes and wealth point to a slightly stronger profile than previously anticipated. The improvement in net exports anticipated in the January Report has occurred more quickly than expected, but further improvement will likely be restrained by the persistent strength in the Canadian dollar and a slightly lower profile for US growth than had previously been projected.
 
While underlying inflation is subdued, a number of temporary factors will boost total CPI inflation to around 3 per cent in the second quarter of 2011 before total CPI inflation converges to the 2 per cent target by the middle of 2012. This short-term volatility reflects the impact of recent sharp increases in energy prices and the ongoing boost from changes in provincial indirect taxes. Core inflation has fallen further in recent months, in part due to temporary factors. It is expected to rise gradually to 2 per cent by the middle of 2012 as excess supply in the economy is slowly absorbed, labour compensation growth stays modest, productivity recovers and inflation expectations remain well anchored.
 
The persistent strength of the Canadian dollar could create even greater headwinds for the Canadian economy, putting additional downward pressure on inflation through weaker-than-expected net exports and larger declines in import prices.
 
Real GDP in Canada grew at an annual rate of 3.3 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2010, and is estimated to have picked up further to 4.2 per cent in the first quarter of 2011. This has been a stronger rebound than was expected at the time of the January Report, reflecting stronger exports and consumption. Higher commodity prices have resulted in large increases in Canada's terms of trade, leading to renewed strong growth in real gross domestic income.
 
Household spending has moved more in line with the growth in household incomes. In the fourth quarter, rapid growth in consumption was consistent with a strong increase in disposable income, leaving the savings rate little changed at 4.0 per cent. While the strong growth in disposable income in the last quarter of 2010 was supported by an improving labour market, it also received a temporary boost from government transfers related to the earlier introduction of the harmonized sales tax in Ontario. In the first quarter, the Bank estimates that growth in consumption slowed in line with moderating income growth, although both continue to be supported by higher terms of trade and gains in household net worth. In that context, residential investment has remained at a high level in recent quarters, although the estimated pickup in activity in the first quarter may partly reflect timing effects related to changes in mortgage insurance rules.
 
Business fixed investment has continued to grow at a robust pace in recent quarters, driven in particular by activity in primary industries. Nonetheless, the estimated level of business investment in the first quarter remained well below its pre-recession peak.
 
While net exports made a greater contribution to growth in the fourth quarter than had been expected at the time of the January Report, this followed a period of persistently large negative contributions through much of 2009 and 2010, and preliminary evidence suggests another negative contribution in the first quarter of 2011. The rebound in exports in the fourth quarter was driven by higher commodity exports, in part due to one-off factors such as restarted and expanded pipeline capacity. While exports of manufactured goods such as motor vehicles have picked up more recently, the supply disruptions that have been experienced in the aftermath of the earthquake in Japan are projected to reduce the growth in the Canadian economy in the second quarter by about half a percentage point, with that lost activity likely to be recovered in subsequent quarters. Import growth has been volatile, largely reflecting swings in inventory investment which, after pulling back sharply in the fourth quarter of 2010, appears to have normalized in the first quarter.
 
Various indicators of capacity pressures suggest the persistence of excess supply in the Canadian economy. The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap indicates that excess capacity in the economy narrowed in the first quarter of 2011, to about -0.9 per cent. The Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey suggests a lesser degree of slack in the economy, with the proportion of firms indicating that they would have difficulty responding to an unexpected increase in demand now back at its historical average. However, the survey also indicates that the proportion of firms facing labour shortages remains well below its historical average. This is consistent with the relatively high unemployment rate and weakness in average weekly hours worked, and implies persistent slack in the labour market.
 
On balance, the Bank judges that the economy continued to operate with a material degree of slack in the first quarter of 2011, at about 1 per cent below its production capacity. This is a smaller gap than the Bank had projected in January.
 
As expected, core CPI inflation has fallen further in recent months. A number of transitory factors have been dampening the year-over-year rate of core inflation, notably the effects of unusually large increases a year ago for motor vehicles and hotel accommodation (the latter related to the Vancouver Winter Olympics), as well as recent rebates on electricity prices in Ontario. In addition, there is evidence that some of the HST-related tax refunds to businesses have been passed through to consumers, lowering core inflation by about 0.3 percentage points, in line with the Bank's prior expectations. Looking through these factors, underlying inflation has remained broadly stable at a rate slightly above 1Ѕ per cent, reflecting persistent excess supply in the economy, as well as the moderate growth of unit labour costs and the appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
 
Total CPI inflation averaged 2.3 per cent in January and February, unchanged from its average rate in the fourth quarter of 2010. The effects of higher world prices for energy and other commodities on Canadian inflation have been tempered by the appreciation of the Canadian dollar. The direct impact of the HST and other changes in provincial indirect taxes instituted since July 2010 are also continuing to boost the 12-month rate of change in total CPI.
 
Measures of near-term inflation expectations have risen slightly in recent months, reflecting observed increases in commodity prices, while measures of longer-term inflation expectations have remained little changed. The April Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation was 2.4 per cent in 2011 and very close to the target in 2012 (2.1 per cent). Expectations for average inflation over the next two years, as reported in the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey, are concentrated within the 1 to 3 per cent control range, with a majority of firms now expecting inflation to be in the upper half of the range, consistent with the recent rapid increase in commodity prices. Market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations continue to be consistent with the 2 per cent inflation-control target. Overall, the Bank judges that inflation expectations are well anchored at the 2 per cent target.
 
Financial conditions in Canada remain exceptionally stimulative, providing important ongoing support to the economic recovery. Despite a modest increase over the past year, effective borrowing costs for households and businesses continue to be very low by historical standards. The growth of total private credit has recently moved somewhat above its historical average, as growth in business credit has picked up sharply.
 
The favourable effective borrowing costs for households are underpinned by the ongoing low level of bank financing costs. Following some slowing in 2010, a pickup in household credit growth has been observed in recent months, partly reflecting stronger activity in the resale housing market.
 
In addition to very low effective borrowing costs, Canadian firms have seen further easing in their access to financing in recent months. According to the Bank's Senior Loan Officer Survey for the first quarter of 2011 , greater competition among lending institutions, and from capital markets, together with a more favourable economic outlook, has led to a further loosening of lending conditions for a wider range of borrowers. Results from the latest Business Outlook Survey also suggest that credit conditions have eased further in recent months. Investor demand for risky assets is buoyant, reflecting expectations of an improving global economy, as well as the low level of government bond yields. Accordingly, credit spreads have remained narrow, corporate bond issuance has been strong and the S&P/TSX Composite Index has recovered further. In response to more favourable financing conditions and the robust recovery in business investment, the overall growth of business credit has picked up markedly in recent months.
 
Compared with the unusually rapid pace registered between the end of 2008 and early 2010, growth in the narrow monetary aggregates has been moderate in recent months, consistent with reduced liquidity preference among households and firms. Growth in the broader M2++ aggregate remains below its historical average, suggesting subdued inflation pressures ahead.
 
The Canadian dollar has averaged 103 cents US since the March fixed announcement date, higher than the 100 cents assumed in the January Report. The Canadian-dollar effective exchange rate index has appreciated to a similar extent.
 
The Bank's base-case projection incorporates the following key assumptions: a Canada/US exchange rate averaging 103 cents US; energy prices in line with recent futures prices; persistently strong prices for non-energy commodities; and supportive global credit conditions.
 
The Bank expects the rotation of aggregate demand in Canada toward business investment and net exports and away from government and household expenditures to continue over the projection horizon. The stronger economic expansion observed in recent quarters is projected to give way to a more modest pace, as the particularly strong rebound in exports observed recently is unlikely to be sustained, given ongoing competitiveness challenges, including headwinds from the persistent strength in the Canadian dollar, as well as the one-off nature of certain elements of the rebound. Some of the recent stronger-than-expected momentum in household spending is projected to persist, however, reflecting in part the effects of higher terms of trade.
 
On an average annual basis, real GDP is projected to grow by 2.9 per cent in 2011 and 2.6 per cent in 2012, while growth in 2013 is expected to equal that of potential output (2.1 per cent), with the economy operating at full capacity. This growth profile implies a slightly higher level of activity across the medium-term projection horizon, with the Bank now expecting the economy to return to full capacity around the middle of 2012, two quarters earlier than had been projected in the January Report.
 
As in January, the Bank expects the growth of consumer spending over the projection horizon to evolve broadly in line with that of personal disposable income, leaving the savings rate relatively stable at a low level and the ratio of household debt to income near historic highs. The growth of disposable income is expected to moderate with the withdrawal of fiscal stimulus, previously announced compensation restraints by governments and a slow recovery in average hours worked. Higher terms of trade are expected to provide some offsetting boost to household incomes over the projection horizon, and have led to higher household wealth. While these supports are projected to result in a slightly stronger profile for consumer spending than had been expected in the January Report, their impact is likely to be limited, with household balance sheets remaining stretched and consumption unlikely to be bolstered by gains in house prices. In that context, and with a projected reduction in housing affordability, residential investment remains unlikely to contribute to overall GDP growth over the projection horizon. Thus, the Bank continues to expect the share of the economy accounted for by consumer spending and residential investment to decline toward its historical average.
 
The Bank's base-case scenario continues to assume that the contribution of government spending to real GDP growth will turn negative over the 2011-12 period, consistent with the previously announced unwinding of fiscal stimulus. Revisions to the national accounts data reveal that more of the stimulus spending appears to have been delivered in 2010 than had been previously estimated, boosting the contribution of government spending in that year and correspondingly reducing its assumed contribution to the growth of GDP in 2011.
 
Business fixed investment is expected to continue to rise rapidly over the projection horizon as the unusually sharp decline experienced during the recession is unwound. This reflects the solid financial positions of Canadian firms, favourable credit conditions, higher commodity prices and the stronger Canadian dollar, as well as the impetus to improve productivity amid heightened pressures to become more competitive. The Bank's Business Outlook Survey has also indicated a consistently high level of investment intentions in recent quarters. Moreover, the latest results from the Public and Private Investment Intentions survey conducted by Statistics Canada suggest some firming in the growth of business investment in 2011. Taking all of these factors into account, the recovery in capital spending over the near term is now projected to be slightly more robust.
 
The Bank continues to expect an improvement in net exports over the projection horizon, as exports recover and expand with rising external demand, and import growth slows from its previously rapid pace with the moderation in the growth of domestic demand. The Bank continues to project, however, that the recovery in exports will be subdued relative to earlier global recoveries, with the higher level of the Canadian dollar assumed in this projection adding to long-standing competitiveness challenges. These forces are also expected to boost imports relative to domestic demand, with the solid growth in business investment having a similar effect, given its high import content. As a result, net exports are expected to make a positive, but modest, contribution to growth over the projection horizon. The strength of net exports will continue to be sensitive to currency movements and the expected recovery in productivity growth, as well as to the prospects for external demand.
 
The Bank expects core inflation to rise gradually to 2 per cent as excess supply in the economy is slowly absorbed and inflation expectations remain well anchored. As in January, this increase reflects the unwinding of the transitory influences currently dampening core inflation, including the effects of HST-related tax refunds passed on by businesses. The combination of ongoing modest growth in labour compensation and higher productivity is expected to continue to dampen inflationary pressures, with the higher assumed value of the Canadian dollar providing further restraint.
 
Although core inflation has been slightly weaker than expected in recent months, it is projected to converge to 2 per cent somewhat more quickly than in the January Report. This reflects the slightly smaller degree of slack in the Canadian economy over the projection horizon, as well as the sharp increases in the prices of agricultural commodities observed in recent months, which are expected to lead to a somewhat larger increase in food prices than had been expected.
 
Total CPI inflation is projected to peak around 3 per cent (on a monthly basis) in the second quarter of 2011, reflecting the impact of recent sharp increases in energy prices and the anticipated rise in core inflation, as well as the ongoing boost to inflation from the HST and other changes in provincial indirect taxes. As with previous changes in indirect taxes, for the purposes of monetary policy, the Bank is looking through the first-round effect on prices. Total CPI inflation is expected to converge to core inflation at the 2 per cent target by the middle of 2012 as energy prices stabilize.
 
This projection includes a gradual reduction in monetary stimulus over the projection horizon, consistent with achieving the inflation target.
 
The uncertainty surrounding the Bank's inflation projection is illustrated using fan charts. Chart 33 and Chart 34 depict the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the second quarter of 2011 to the end of 2013.
 
Although the global economic recovery is expected to continue at a steady pace, global risks remain elevated.
 
The two main upside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the possibility of higher-than-projected commodity prices and global inflation, and increased momentum in Canadian household spending.
 
If efforts to restrain excess demand and mounting inflation pressures in emerging-market economies prove unsuccessful, commodity prices and global inflation could rise much faster than projected, raising incomes in Canada through higher export prices and increasing pressures on domestic prices.
 
There could be stronger-than-expected momentum in household expenditures in Canada. With exceptionally stimulative financing conditions, borrowing could grow faster than income.
 
The two main downside risks to inflation relate to headwinds from the persistent strength in the Canadian dollar and the possibility that growth in household spending could be weaker than projected.
 
The persistent strength of the Canadian dollar could create even greater headwinds for the Canadian economy, putting additional downward pressure on inflation through weaker-than-expected net exports and larger declines in import prices.
 
High household debt levels in Canada could lead to a sharper-than-expected deceleration in household spending. Relatedly, if there were a sudden weakening in the Canadian housing sector, it could have sizable spillover effects on other areas of the economy.
 
In addition, global uncertainty is being affected by high private and sovereign debt levels in many advanced economies, geopolitical tensions and the evolving situation in Japan in the aftermath of the Tohoku earthquake.
 
Overall, the Bank judges that the risks to the inflation outlook in Canada are roughly balanced over the projection horizon.