Since last November's Monetary Policy Report, a number of unanticipated developments have required reassessment and response by the Bank. The unfolding events in Asia and the sharp decline in primary commodity prices, which have had significant economic and financial market implications for Canada, were not readily predictable. At the same time, an unexpectedly strong US economy has helped to partly offset the negative effects of the Asian crisis. Late last year, inflation temporarily dropped below 1 per cent (the lower bound of the Bank's target range). In addition, strikes by postal workers and by Ontario teachers in the fourth quarter of 1997, together with the January ice storm in eastern Canada, have had significant short-term effects on production and demand in the economy.
 
During this period of uncertainty and temporary setbacks, the Bank attempted to identify the more lasting influences on the economy and inflation. In addition, it had to address the volatility in financial markets associated with the uncertainty surrounding the shocks. This volatility was most clearly evident in several sharp declines in the external value of the Canadian dollar. Under these circumstances, the Bank raised short-term rates three times since the November Report, by a total of 125 basis points. These actions were prompted by two basic considerations. First, despite the fallout from the problems in Asia, the underlying momentum of the Canadian economy remained positive, and the persistent decline in the Canadian dollar was leading to an undesirable easing in monetary conditions, which were already stimulative. Second, at times, the speed of decline in the currency was such that, had it continued, there was a clear risk that investor confidence in Canadian dollar assets would have been undermined.
 
Although there are continuing uncertainties and downside risks to the immediate outlook, stemming from the Asian situation, there have been signs that stability is returning to most of southeast Asia and Korea. On balance, the Bank feels that the economic expansion in Canada, supported by both external and internal factors, will remain solid through this year and into 1999, although not as strong as expected last autumn. The details of this outlook and the policy implications for maintaining inflation inside the Bank's target range are the subject of this Report.
 
Core inflation (CPI excluding food, energy, and the effect of indirect taxes) dropped temporarily below the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent target range late last year. On balance, however, it declined only slightly over the past six months. Contributing to the decline were intensifying competitive pressures in the retail market.
 
The 12-month rate of increase in the core CPI edged down from 1.5 per cent last September to 1.2 per cent in March. This decline was not anticipated in last November's Report.
 
It was noted at that time that retailers were trying to restore profit margins by raising prices. In fact, price discounting subsequently increased as competition among retailers to maintain or expand market share intensified. There still appears to be significant excess capacity in this sector, which will probably take quite some time to correct. Currency depreciations in Asia also intensified competition, particularly among motor vehicle producers. More fundamentally, the ongoing slack in product markets has continued to put downward pressure on inflation. The major offsetting factor working to hold inflation up appears to be expectations of inflation that remain close to the 2 per cent midpoint of the range.
 
The brief fall of core CPI inflation below the target range last November and December was caused by transitory factors. These included increased automobile rebates, exceptionally heavy discounts on clothing, promotions of new cablevision channels, and an earlier-than-expected seasonal decline in hotel rates.
 
The levels of two other statistical measures of the trend rate of inflation (CPIX and CPIW) are currently very similar to that of core inflation.
 
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was 0.9 per cent in March 1998, compared with 1.6 per cent in September 1997. This decline is mainly tied to falling energy prices stemming from lower prices for crude oil.
 
Broad inflation measures have also eased substantially since the last Report. The chain price index for GDP - a measure of price changes using weights that adjust to keep up with shifts in the composition of spending - showed no inflation at the end of 1997 from its level a year earlier, compared with a year-over-year rate of 1.0 per cent in the second quarter of 1997. In addition to the factors lowering CPI inflation, the broad measures, which include the prices of exported products, have been directly affected by the considerable decline in the prices of primary commodity exports.
 
For manufacturing, the aggregate industrial product price index has shown relatively modest increases on a year-over-year basis. These gains have mainly reflected the impact of the Canadian dollar depreciation on export prices for such products as motor vehicles and many manufactured commodities, where contracts are typically in US dollars.
 
As expected, the Canadian economy expanded at a rapid pace during 1997, with real GDP increasing by 4.2 per cent (fourth quarter over fourth quarter). This expansion continued to be supported by accommodative monetary conditions and by strong growth in the US economy. It was accompanied by marked gains in employment during the year. Over the second half of 1997, the underlying momentum of the economy remained robust. However, two major strikes (postal workers and Ontario teachers) shaved about 0.5 percentage points off GDP growth, which was recorded at 3.5 per cent.
 
Several temporary influences also affected the pace of activity in the first quarter of 1998. The recovery from the fourth-quarter labour disruptions provided a boost to economic growth. In contrast, the January ice storm in eastern Canada, which has significantly affected the month-to-month changes in activity, is estimated to have lowered real GDP growth in the first quarter by about 0.2 percentage points. This should subsequently be more than made up as a result of the reconstruction effort. At the same time, the fallout from developments in Asia and lower commodity prices began to have a tempering effect on growth. When all the factors are considered, growth in the first quarter is estimated to have been in a range of about 3 to 3 per cent (at an annual rate).
 
Export volumes rose briskly in the second half of 1997, partly because of strong US demand for machinery and equipment and consumer durable goods. Exports of non-energy commodities also grew substantially in spite of price declines. But within this category, lumber exports fell markedly, following a sharp decline in housing demand in Japan. More generally, exports to Japan and other Asian countries declined over the period, but these account for only about 8 per cent of Canada's total merchandise exports.
 
In the last half of 1997, businesses continued to substantially increase their spending on capital goods, especially on machinery and equipment.
 
Investment in non-farm inventories also rose in this period, stimulated by continued strong growth in sales. At times, some inventory imbalances emerged in certain segments of the retail sector, such as motor vehicle dealerships and department stores. At year-end, inventories still appeared to be too high in some retail categories (such as department stores).
 
Household expenditures continued to rise strongly in the second half of 1997, although at a slightly lower rate than in the first half. Consumer spending on durable goods, particularly motor vehicles, grew at a healthy pace, as a result of low interest rates, pent-up demand, and continued marked gains in employment. The very substantial increases in both full-time jobs and hiring by firms (as opposed to self-employment) have kept consumer confidence high. It appears, however, that some spending on motor vehicles towards year-end was brought forward from the first quarter of 1998 in response to special financing incentives and rebates offered by North American producers. The growth of household spending on items other than consumer durable goods slowed somewhat, partly in response to the effect of the work stoppages on incomes.
 
Imports continued to increase substantially in the second half of 1997. This rise was especially pronounced because the growth in domestic spending came mainly from purchases of machinery and equipment and motor vehicles, a large portion of which tend to be imported. In addition, many of our highly manufactured exports have a very large import content. As Asian currencies depreciated, imports from these countries, which account for about 12 per cent of Canada's total merchandise imports, rose more strongly than total imports.
 
With imports rising more strongly than exports and commodity prices declining, there was a further deterioration in the current account deficit to almost 3 per cent of GDP at year-end.
 
In the first quarter of 1998, the recovery from the two major strikes gave a boost to household spending on items other than motor vehicles and energy. Consumer expenditures were also supported by continued strong employment growth in the private sector. On balance, however, the underlying pace of expansion moderated somewhat. Lower shipments of energy commodities and a reduction in the growth of automotive product exports led to slower export growth than in the second half of 1997, and the rate of increase in business investment slowed from last year's robust pace. Because of the reduced demand for energy (reflecting the relatively mild winter) and a decline in motor vehicle sales, imports were little changed.
 
With aggregate spending during the last half of 1997 and early this year continuing to expand at a rate greater than the growth of potential output, slack in the economy continued to be taken up. Bank staff estimate that the output gap narrowed to about 1 per cent at the end of 1997, down from 1 per cent at mid-1997.
 
There is considerable uncertainty about the measurement of the output gap. Nonetheless, it is useful for policy purposes to make provisional point estimates of its most likely value. These estimates are reviewed as new data come in.
 
Wage increases remained moderate in the second half of 1997. Annual wage settlements in the unionized private sector averaged 1.7 per cent, compared with 2.4 per cent in the first half. Wage settlements in the public sector edged up, averaging 1.4 per cent in the second half of 1997. The average pay increase for non-unionized employees was 2.6 per cent in 1997, based on the Conference Board of Canada's compensation outlook survey. Thus, the average underlying wage increase in the total economy is estimated to have been close to 2 per cent on a year-over-year basis. This is confirmed by a new source of wage data from Statistics Canada. For instance, in the first quarter of 1998, the year-over-year increase in the average hourly wage, excluding over-time, was 1.5 per cent for all permanent employees and 2.4 per cent for permanent full-time employees.
 
Productivity growth increased last year, partly because of the cyclical pickup in output. As a result, unit labour costs edged down by year-end. The growth of labour income per employee had been unexpectedly high early in 1997 because of larger-than-normal bonus payments that were associated in part with the productivity gains.
 
The Bank aims at directing monetary conditions along a path that will move the trend rate of inflation towards the centre of the target range over time. In making its judgment about this desired path, the Bank uses information from many sources on developments that will influence the trend of inflation. Most important is the expected trend in the level of aggregate demand relative to the economy's potential supply. Since there is considerable uncertainty about the future evolution of these variables, the desired level of monetary conditions at any time is not precise, but rather is a range within which the Bank is comfortable. New information and changing views of the probable profile of spending and its implications for future inflation may change the desired path for monetary conditions. At times, there may be considerable uncertainty regarding the effects on the Canadian economy of external or domestic shocks. In these circumstances, it may be appropriate for the Bank to wait for more information before deciding on any change in the path for monetary conditions. In the meantime, monetary conditions may fluctuate over quite a wide range without drawing a response from the Bank.
 
In the Report issued last November, the Bank drew attention to the anticipated closing of the output gap over the coming quarters and to the implied need for some reduction, over the medium term, in the degree of monetary stimulus being provided to the economy. The November Report also recognized the unfolding situation in Asia, noting that close attention would have to be paid to the implications for the Canadian economy.
 
As the crisis in southeast Asia deepened and spread to Korea, there was a tendency for financial markets and commentators to assume a "worst-case scenario." Pessimistic views about the impact of the Asian crisis on the evolution of commodity markets and on the Canadian economy, together with a worldwide flight to US assets by investors, resulted in a reduction in the relative attractiveness of Canadian dollar instruments. This was exacerbated by the occasional recurrence of nervousness about political developments in Quebec. In addition, there was some uncertainty in the markets about the likely reaction of monetary policy to all these developments. Together, these factors led to volatility in Canadian financial markets and several episodes of sharp downward pressure on the Canadian dollar. The extent of the resulting depreciation was seen by the Bank as an inappropriate easing of monetary conditions. Some important positive developments for the Canadian economy appeared to have been overlooked by markets, particularly the persistent strength of the US economy, as well as the significant declines in medium - and long-term interest rates. Under the circumstances, the Bank raised the Bank Rate on three occasions, by a total of 125 basis points. These actions were intended both to counter the undesired easing in monetary conditions and to forestall a potential loss of confidence in Canadian dollar assets.
 
The forces at play resulted in considerable volatility in monetary conditions over the past six months, and the Bank's monetary conditions index has fluctuated over a relatively wide range. A low of -6.2 was reached near the end of January. Since then, the MCI has varied between -4.5 and -5.5. This means that, following the increases in short-term interest rates, monetary conditions have been somewhat less stimulative compared with the very accommodative range of -5.0 to -6.0 that had prevailed for much of 1997.
 
As a result of the three changes, the Bank Rate increased from 3.75 per cent to 5 per cent. The increase on 25 November was 25 basis points, while those on 12 December and 30 January were 50 basis points each. Short-term yields rose in step with these increases. With little change in short-term rates in the United States, three-month differentials have narrowed, but Canadian short-term rates are still some 60 to 70 basis points below those in the United States.
 
Following the interest rate increases, the Canadian dollar recovered from the record low of 68.10 US cents on 29 January. Nevertheless, over the past six months the Canadian dollar fell in value by about 1 per cent against the US dollar. The US dollar's persistent strength against all major currencies over the period stemmed from the US economy's strong performance. It also reflected a shift by investors towards the world's most liquid financial market in response to the turbulence in Asia. As a result, when measured against the currencies of all the G-10 countries, the Canadian dollar has declined less than against the US dollar alone.
 
Bond markets in many countries in the G-10 area, including Canada, have been buoyant, partly because of an improved inflation outlook, and partly because of the flight of capital from Asian countries. In spite of the increases in domestic short-term interest rates, Canadian bond yields have declined to new lows. Moreover, the negative long-term differential against the United States has persisted despite the safe-haven attraction of US dollar investments.
 
The rise in short-term rates and the decline in long-term rates has caused the yield curve to pivot, and to have a progressively flatter slope. In the past, the slope of the yield curve has been a good predictor of changes in output, and such a flattening has often been followed by slower output growth. However, the declines in bond yields over the past couple of years have largely resulted from lower expectations of inflation and lower risk premiums. These lower risk premiums provide a stimulus to economic activity.
 
When assessing the likely path of inflation over the next two years, the Bank looks closely at the current and anticipated amount of aggregate excess supply or demand, measures of inflation expectations, and the rate of monetary expansion. The Bank reviews all important factors, both external and internal, that could influence the evolution of aggregate demand and supply.
 
The effect of the Asian crisis on the world economy and the sharp declines in commodity prices, stemming from the crisis and from other sources, represent a significant negative external shock for the Canadian economy. However, the effects of this shock are being partly offset by positive developments elsewhere. In response to the Asian crisis and to an improved inflation outlook, medium - and long-term interest rates have declined in the major industrial countries, including Canada. These declines in rates have also helped to boost the value of equities. Recent financial market developments are thus working to help sustain demand in many industrial countries. In addition, and perhaps most importantly, the US economy has continued to outperform expectations.
 
The expansion of aggregate demand in the United States was surprisingly strong throughout 1997 and outstripped the estimated growth of capacity. Although the momentum of the US economy continued to be greater than expected into the first quarter of 1998, the growth of real GDP should slow to a more sustainable rate this year as net exports decline in response to a loss of competitiveness and weak Asian demand. An anticipated inventory correction should also moderate growth somewhat.
 
US inflation, as measured by the CPI excluding food and energy prices, has been stable at around 2.2 per cent since last September. Although the strong US dollar is expected to put further modest downward pressure on inflation over the remainder of this year, the recent rise in wage pressures could push inflation up in 1999.
 
Monetary conditions in the United States have continued to tighten since mid-1997, owing to the appreciation of the US dollar. The low inflation rate and the anticipated impact of the Asian crisis on the US economy have helped to keep short-term rates steady. However, unless the Asian crisis has a significant dampening effect on the US economy over the longer term, the Federal Reserve may be faced with the need to raise interest rates to counter a buildup of inflation pressures.
 
Developments in Mexico have also been positive. Growth in 1997 averaged 7 per cent and is expected to remain robust this year.
 
In the major European countries, the situation has been mixed. Growth in the United Kingdom has begun to slow in response to past tightening in monetary conditions and increased fiscal restraint. Domestic demand in France and Italy has strengthened, while in Germany it has remained relatively weak. With growth in the continental European economies expected to pick up in the first half of 1998, the overall outlook for Europe in 1998 is bright.
 
The Japanese economy failed to recover significantly in the second half of 1997, after contracting sharply in the second quarter. The government has taken important actions to recapitalize financial institutions, and further fiscal measures are planned. Despite these initiatives, little economic improvement is expected this year, owing to the adverse impact of the Asian crisis, the fragility of the financial sector, and the low level of consumer and business confidence. Increasingly, the Japanese economy is becoming the major source of uncertainty for the world economy.
 
International commodity prices are expected to recover somewhat in the second half of 1998. The anticipated reduction in global excess capacity, together with a correction for some possible overshooting of commodity markets on the downside, should contribute to a firming in the prices of industrial materials.
 
Overall, the growth of Canadian exports is expected to ease this year, as developments in Asia and an anticipated moderation in US economic growth more than offset the stimulus of the recent exchange rate depreciation. The recent decreases in commodity prices are likely to lead to further cutbacks in production at high-cost sites. This could adversely affect the volume of commodity exports over the near term, until the expected rise in commodity prices occurs.
 
On the domestic front, business investment, supported by low medium - and long-term interest rates, is expected to remain relatively strong in 1998. Capital outlays will also be boosted by the rebuilding of electrical transmission and distribution networks made necessary by the ice storm in eastern Canada. Overall, however, the increase in business investment will likely be less than the strong gains in both 1996 and 1997, as some resource-based projects will be held back by past decreases in commodity prices. Inventory investment is likely to be reduced somewhat as some retailers correct stock imbalances.
 
Continued gains in full-time employment, low interest rates, and rising private sector wealth should support robust growth in household demand, including housing. But there is some risk that consumer outlays will be less buoyant, to the extent that much of the pent-up demand for consumer durables and housing has already been met.
 
On the basis of the evidence currently available, the Bank anticipates growth of about 3 per cent (at annual rates) through to the fourth quarter of 1998 and into the first half of 1999. On an annual average basis, the implied growth for 1998 is also 3 per cent. This is somewhat stronger than the most recent average of private sector forecasts, which has edged down to 3.3 per cent. In the Bank's view, the economy should reach a level close to the current estimate of full capacity during the course of 1999. Since estimates of full capacity are inexact, the Bank will closely monitor all the indicators that could provide information on the capacity of the economy. Throughout the remainder of this year, however, slack in goods and labour markets should continue to put downward pressure on inflation.
 
While a number of structural changes are still under way in the retail sector, the recent degree of price discounting could lessen somewhat through the rest of 1998. Recent Asian currency movements, however, may contribute to some price cutting - particularly for motor vehicles, other durable goods, clothing and footwear - as retailers turn to cheaper sources of supply. In contrast, the recent depreciation of the Canadian dollar against the US dollar will put upward pressure on the prices of many imported goods over the next year or two. On balance, these temporary factors should have little net effect on the core CPI in the next few months. More upward pressure on prices is likely, however, towards the end of this year and into 1999, as the lagged effects from the recent depreciation of the Canadian dollar against the US dollar become increasingly important.
 
Wage rates are expected to rise at a moderate rate through 1998 because of low price inflation and continued excess supply in the labour market. Productivity growth may edge down this year along with output growth, so unit labour costs may increase, but only modestly. Such an outlook for labour costs would be consistent with core inflation remaining in the lower half of the target range this year.
 
In the regular survey reported in the Conference Board's December Index of Business Confidence, 78 per cent of respondents continued to expect inflation to be 2 per cent or less over the near term. This is down slightly from 84 per cent in the September survey. A survey of private forecasters by the Department of Finance in February showed CPI inflation averaging 1.5 per cent this year and 1.7 per cent in 1999. More recent projections for 1998 average 1.3 per cent. Over the past six months, forecasters have revised their near-term projections downwards (2 per cent had been predicted for 1998 last September) in response to the unexpected decline in inflation observed in November and December and expectations that slack in the economy would take longer to be absorbed. Long-term inflation forecasts gathered by Consensus Economics Inc. are very close to the midpoint of the target range.
 
As the yield on conventional bonds has continued to decline, so has the differential between the yields on nominal and Real Return Bonds. Since November, this spread has fallen below 2 per cent, the midpoint of the current inflation-control target range. This should not be taken as a precise estimate of the expected rate of inflation because the yield spread is also affected by differences in secondary market liquidity and by the shifting portfolio needs and preferences of investors. Nevertheless, the decline in the nominal-real interest differential is clear evidence that the financial markets have increasing confidence in low inflation over a long horizon.
 
After slowing in the second half of 1997, the year-over-year growth of narrow money, M1, picked up in the first quarter of 1998. However, slowing is expected to resume in the second half of 1998 and to continue into 1999. An appreciable part of the surge since 1996 has been due to the introduction of more attractive interest rates paid on demand deposits and to the decline of other short-term interest rates in recent years. The portfolio shifts occasioned by these developments should now be almost complete. The Bank estimates that a long-run rate of increase in M1 of about 2 to 5 per cent would be consistent with inflation within the target range and growth at potential.
 
The current rate of M1 increase remains high enough to support robust growth of output, and declining excess capacity, in the first half of 1998. As the chart shows, there has been a fairly close correspondence over the business cycle between changes in the real value of M1 and those in GDP about two quarters later.
 
Broad money represents a liquid store of value. The Canadian broad aggregates consist mainly of liquid assets held by the personal sector, and their behaviour may carry information about the value of planned outlays by households. In fact, broad money has, in the past, been a good indicator of short-term nominal spending and core inflation. But the enormous shift from deposits to mutual funds has rendered the previously accepted definitions obsolete. For the time being, we can only estimate a range for the underlying growth. An adjusted M2+ aggregate, which contains only mutual funds sponsored by deposit-taking financial institutions, provides a lower bound; the corresponding upper bound can be derived from a very broad aggregate M2++, which includes all mutual fund holdings. On this basis, underlying broad money growth over the past year is estimated at between 1 and 7 per cent. The Bank is engaged in research to provide a more precise measure within this band. As matters stand, the rates of increase recently experienced seem to be in line with continued low inflation.
 
Three factors should put some upward pressure on core inflation. First, inflation expectations appear to be above the current rate of inflation. Second, some of the effect of the intense competitive pressures in the retail sector that has been putting downward pressure on inflation should wear off in coming months. Third, the recent depreciation of the Canadian dollar will tend to raise prices slightly.
 
At the same time, there are factors that lead us to expect core inflation to remain below the 2 per cent midpoint: slack in product and labour markets; continued growth in productivity that will limit rises in unit labour costs; and downward pressure on the prices of imports from East Asia.
 
Overall, we expect our measure of core CPI inflation to increase slightly over the balance of 1998. Our projection for the end of the year and the first half of 1999 is between 1 and 2 per cent. None of the factors at work imply a persistent rise in the trend rate of inflation.
 
In last November's Report, it was concluded, based on the strength of the economic outlook at that time, that measured steps to moderate the degree of monetary stimulus would be required over the medium term to preserve low inflation and bring about a long-lasting expansion.
 
This Report continues to present the view that the underlying momentum of the Canadian economy is strong. However, in light of the impact of the Asian situation and lower commodity prices, the outlook is not quite as strong as had been expected. On the basis of the evidence currently available, the average annual rate of economic expansion through to the middle of 1999 is projected to be about 3 per cent.
 
Prospects for inflation are little changed. For the balance of 1998 and the first half of 1999, our measure of core CPI inflation is expected to rise slightly but to stay in the lower half of the inflation-control target range.
 
While the uncertainty surrounding the outlook is much greater than usual, the risks associated with it appear balanced. The main downside risks relate to developments in Asia and commodity prices. Offsetting these is evidence, particularly from the continuing strength of the US economy and from the expansion of the narrow monetary aggregate, M1, in Canada, that the underlying momentum of the economy might be stronger than we expect.
 
When all these factors are considered, it is the Bank's judgment that between now and the next Report, monetary conditions in the recent range would be broadly appropriate in the absence of further shocks. This would be consistent with the above outlook of robust aggregate demand, the economy continuing to take up slack, and inflation inside the target range. Given the degree of uncertainty that is likely to persist over this period, monetary conditions may continue to fluctuate over a relatively wide range. Subsequently, if the underlying momentum of activity remains as strong as is currently expected, less-stimulative monetary conditions would be called for as the economy approaches and achieves full capacity.