The global economic outlook is slightly weaker than the Bank projected in its October Monetary Policy Report. At the same time, global tail risks have diminished. The economic expansion in the United States is continuing at a gradual pace, restrained by ongoing public and private deleveraging, global weakness and, more recently, by the uncertainty related to fiscal negotiations. Despite a marked improvement in peripheral sovereign debt markets, Europe remains in recession, and recent indicators point to a somewhat more protracted downturn than expected in October. While growth in China is improving, economic activity has been slowing further in some other major emerging economies.
 
Global economic growth is estimated to have slowed markedly in 2012, falling to 3.0 per cent, from 3.9 per cent in 2011. In 2013, the global economy is projected to continue to grow modestly, at a rate of 2.9 per cent, before picking up to 3.5 per cent in 2014. The Bank's base-case scenario is predicated on the assumptions that the crisis in the euro area will remain contained and that a severe tightening of US fiscal policy will be avoided. Overall, recent developments support these assumptions.
 
Considerable excess capacity in some advanced economies and the absence of underlying inflationary pressures have led central banks in these countries to undertake additional unconventional measures while maintaining historically low policy interest rates. Supported by these actions and by positive policy developments in Europe, global financial conditions have improved, and commodity prices have stayed at historically elevated levels.
 
Global financial conditions have improved since the last Report and are increasingly supportive of growth. Investors continue to be cautious, however, reflecting ongoing concerns about the prospects for global economic growth, policy implementation in the euro area, and uncertainty surrounding the US fiscal outlook and debt-ceiling negotiations. Trading volumes across asset classes have generally been low in recent months, with many market participants preferring to sit on the sidelines.
 
In the euro area, positive developments have led to a significant easing in financial conditions since the October Report. Euro-area finance ministers (the Eurogroup) have agreed to disburse the next loan tranche to Greece from the European Financial Stability Facility and to further support Greece's debt sustainability by lengthening the term of the loans and lowering the interest rate. European Union finance ministers also reached an agreement on a common bank supervisory framework for the euro area. In light of these and other developments, funding conditions have improved for European banks. Moreover, peripheral euro-area sovereign bonds and European equity markets have performed well since the October Report. Yields on 10-year bonds for most peripheral euro-area countries have declined sharply, returning to levels recorded in late 2010, and euro-area stock market indexes have outperformed those of most other major economies. Significant risks nevertheless remain. There are signs of continuing fragmentation in the European financial system, which is contributing to a divergence in borrowing rates across countries, and the most recent bank lending survey in the euro area suggests that banks continue to tighten credit standards on loans to businesses.
 
In the United States, the Federal Reserve announced its intention to provide further policy accommodation through purchases of longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of US$45 billion per month.  This new initiative, which replaces the recently expired Maturity Extension Program, was in line with market expectations. The Federal Reserve also modified its forward guidance by linking future rate increases to specific thresholds for economic indicators (instead of providing a conditional time horizon). The federal funds rate is thus expected to stay at exceptionally low levels at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6.5 per cent, subject to projected inflation one and two years ahead remaining below 2.5 per cent and longer-term inflation expectations continuing to be well anchored.
 
Sentiment improved in US financial markets following the partial resolution of the fiscal cliff, with yields on Treasuries and other major government bonds increasing markedly, especially at the long end of the yield curve. US financial conditions nevertheless remain supportive of growth, with corporate credit yields near record-low levels despite the rise in Treasuries. US high-yield spreads have narrowed further, and issuance has remained exceptionally robust, underpinned by strong investor demand for corporate bonds. While the debate over the fiscal cliff put downward pressure on US equity prices toward the end of 2012, they have since rebounded, reflecting the recent improvement in market sentiment.
 
US GDP growth accelerated to 3.1 per cent in the third quarter of 2012. Temporary increases in defence spending and a strong contribution from inventory investment more than offset a decline in business fixed investment, which partly reflected ongoing uncertainty surrounding the future course of fiscal policy. However, the Bank estimates that US GDP growth slowed sharply in the fourth quarter of 2012, dampened by weak external demand, the persistent drag from elevated uncertainty and the effects of Hurricane Sandy.
 
The pace of US economic activity is expected to improve gradually through 2013 and 2014. On an average annual basis, GDP growth is projected to reach 2.1 per cent in 2013 and 3.1 per cent in 2014, revised down slightly from the October Report. Growth is supported by highly accommodative monetary policy, a reduction in uncertainty associated with fiscal policy, continuing improvement in the housing market and a gradual pickup in external demand. Nevertheless, fiscal consolidation and, to a lesser degree, household deleveraging will continue to restrain activity. Overall, the US economy is projected to expand at a relatively modest pace, consistent with other economies that have experienced severe financial crises.
 
Fiscal consolidation will exert a significant drag on US economic growth, as expected in the October Report. Although the adoption of the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012 means that the fiscal cliff has, to a large extent, been avoided, negotiations on other important issues are ongoing, and much uncertainty remains. The Bank continues to assume that US fiscal policy will subtract roughly 1.5 percentage points from growth in both 2013 and 2014.
 
US households have made considerable progress in repairing their balance sheets. However, while the drag from household deleveraging is expected to diminish over the projection horizon, tighter fiscal policy and a gradual improvement in employment suggest that consumer expenditures will grow only modestly. Residential investment, in contrast, has rebounded strongly in recent quarters, albeit from historically low levels. Home-builder sentiment has improved significantly, and the number of housing starts is well above the level recorded a year ago. Underlying demographic demand and significantly improved affordability are expected to boost residential construction over the projection horizon.
 
US business fixed investment slowed markedly through the first three quarters of 2012 as a result of the heightened uncertainty associated with the fiscal outlook. A rapid increase in investment spending is expected in mid-2013, supported by healthy corporate balance sheets and record-low corporate yields. The level of investment is projected to be lower than was expected at the time of the October Report, however, reflecting a larger and more persistent impact from elevated excess capacity and tight borrowing conditions in the commercial real estate sector.
 
US export growth is projected to remain weak in early 2013, constrained by sluggish demand from major trading partners, especially Europe. A gradual rebound is expected beginning in the middle of the year as global demand starts to recover. Exports are nevertheless somewhat lower than previously anticipated, consistent with downward revisions to the outlooks for both Canada and the euro area. Although US imports are expected to pick up with the improvement in domestic demand, overseas energy imports will be dampened by increased production from domestic sources.
 
Euro-area GDP contracted by 0.3 per cent in the third quarter of 2012, its fourth consecutive decline, and recent indicators point to a deepening recession in the fourth quarter. The deterioration in industrial production in  Germany and France suggests that depressed demand from the peripheral countries is increasingly affecting activity in the core countries, especially business investment.
 
Despite improving market sentiment, the euro-area economy is expected to remain very weak, with bank deleveraging, fiscal austerity, financial market tensions and heightened uncertainty weighing on the growth of domestic demand. Recent data on real activity, as well as the latest bank credit data, suggest that the economic recovery will be slower than originally thought, in part because fiscal austerity measures and tight credit conditions are taking a greater-than-expected toll on economic activity. Euro-area GDP growth in 2013 and 2014 has therefore been revised down to -0.3 per cent and 0.8 per cent, respectively.
 
Even with some recent moderation, headline inflation remains slightly above the European Central Bank's target of "below, but close to, 2 per cent," boosted by high energy prices and increases in indirect taxes and administered prices in some euro-area countries. However, inflation is expected to fall below 2 per cent in 2013 following the runoff of these temporary factors, as significant excess capacity continues to dampen price pressures.
 
Although the tail risks associated with Europe have diminished, substantial fiscal and structural adjustments will be needed over an extended period to contain the crisis and put the euro area onto a sustainable path. As a result, market and business confidence will likely be restored only gradually.
 
Real GDP in Japan fell by 3.5 per cent in the third quarter of 2012, owing to a sharp decline in both exports and private domestic demand. While some of the recent weakness can be attributed to geopolitical tensions with China, the contraction was more pronounced and more broadly based than anticipated in October.
 
Real GDP is expected to grow at a modest pace through 2013 and 2014. A gradual pickup in foreign demand, aided by a return to more normal relations with China and the lagged effects of the recent depreciation of the yen, is expected to boost economic activity. Domestic demand continues to rely on macro policies for growth, with new monetary and fiscal measures more than offsetting the waning support from post-earthquake spending on reconstruction.  However, the planned increase in the value-added tax on consumption is expected to dampen growth in 2014.
 
Real GDP growth in China picked up in the fourth quarter, increasing to 7.9 per cent on a year-over-year basis, consistent with the recent improvement in industrial production. This rebound follows a gradual deceleration over the past three years, driven mainly by reduced growth in foreign demand and, more recently, efforts by Chinese authorities to rein in an overheated property market. As in the October Report, economic growth is expected to stabilize in a range of 7.5 per cent to 8 per cent through 2014, supported in the near term by announced fiscal policy measures and strong credit growth and, subsequently, by a pickup in global demand. In addition, healthy wage increases should help boost domestic consumption. Investment growth, on the other hand, is expected to slow gradually, owing in part to more modest spending on housing. Policy-makers will likely be cautious about providing additional stimulus in order to avoid exacerbating existing imbalances in the economy.
 
With consumer price inflation at 2.5 per cent in December, inflationary pressures in China remain contained. In coming months, however, rising world food prices, caused by severe droughts in a number of major food-producing countries, are expected to exert upward pressure on China's rate of inflation.
 
In other emerging-market economies , such as Brazil, India and Russia, the pace of economic activity has continued to slow or has stagnated. Weak external demand (particularly from the euro area) is dampening exports. Domestically, declining investment growth continues to weigh on activity, reflecting slow progress in implementing structural reforms, tight financing conditions and, in some cases, the lagged impact of past policy tightening.
 
Although some EMEs have entered 2013 with solid momentum, there is still significant regional differentiation. The slight improvement in growth prospects is mainly concentrated in emerging Asia and parts of Latin America, while activity in emerging Europe continues to slow, given its close links with the euro area. Economic growth in EMEs is thus expected to be relatively modest through the first half of 2013 before gradually picking up as export markets strengthen somewhat and monetary and fiscal policies provide support. New fiscal measures are being implemented in Korea and Brazil, and most EMEs have the fiscal capacity to provide additional stimulus if needed.
 
Global commodity prices remain elevated. Global prices for crude oil, as measured by the Brent benchmark, have fluctuated within a relatively narrow range since the October Report, and continue to be boosted by tensions in the Middle East. Although still depressed by excess supply conditions in North America, the West Texas Intermediate benchmark has increased steadily since mid-December, leading to a narrower discount relative to Brent. The latest futures curves suggest a modest decline in Brent crude oil prices over the projection horizon as geopolitical tensions abate, while WTI prices are expected to remain relatively flat. Progress toward alleviating the current supply glut should result in a further gradual narrowing of the spread between these two benchmarks.
 
While natural gas prices are still very low at US$3.50 per million Btu, they are well above the decade low recorded in April 2012. This increase largely reflects significant progress on the switchover from coal to natural gas for electricity generation. Natural gas prices retreated somewhat in December, owing to warmer-than-expected weather conditions, but have rebounded recently and are now close to the levels observed at the time of the October Report. The futures curve indicates a steady rise in natural gas prices to slightly above US$4 per million Btu by the end of 2014, similar to expectations in October.
 
Base metals prices are little changed since the last Report, but are expected to rise gradually in coming years, supported by continued steady growth in demand from EMEs. Prices for forestry products, in contrast, have surged by more than 10 per cent since mid-October and are projected to increase further in tandem with the recovery in the US housing sector. Although prices for agricultural products are also projected to rise through mid-2013, reflecting a delayed increase in livestock prices following the drought in 2012, they should ease thereafter as the supply of grains begins to normalize. Prices for non-energy commodities have been revised up slightly over the projection horizon, relative to the October Report.
 
External demand for Canada's manufacturing exports remains quite modest relative to its pre-recession level, largely because of the still-low level of activity in the US housing sector.  As the US housing market recovers and business investment activity strengthens, the foreign activity measure is expected to accelerate and grow at a faster pace than US GDP. Owing to the downward revision to the projected profile for US business fixed investment, the level of external demand for Canadian goods is anticipated to remain below expectations at the time of the October Report.
 
Despite rising WTI oil prices, the Bank of Canada's commodity price index is little changed since mid-October, with the marked decline in the prices received by Canadian producers of heavy crude oil offsetting the sharp increase in the prices of forestry products. Constraints on pipeline capacity and refinery outages have pushed the price of Western Canada Select down from US$78 per barrel to slightly less than US$60 per barrel. These developments have put pressure on Canada's terms of trade and real gross domestic income, and have contributed to the recent slowdown in engineering investment in Canada.
 
The BCPI is expected to rise modestly over the projection horizon, as WCS prices move higher in response to easing constraints on refinery and pipeline capacity. Gradually rising prices for natural gas and base metals, as well as further gains in the prices of forestry products, are also expected to contribute to the increase in the BCPI. Given the lower projected prices for domestically produced oil, however, the BCPI is expected to remain below the level anticipated at the time of the October Report over most of the projection horizon.
 
The Canadian dollar has traded within a relatively narrow range since the October Report, averaging 101 cents US, the same level as assumed in October. It is assumed to remain at this level over the projection horizon.
 
The slowdown in the Canadian economy in the second half of 2012 was more pronounced than the Bank had anticipated at the time of the October Report. In particular, exports and business fixed investment have been weaker, reflecting both foreign and domestic developments. While global tail risks have diminished, foreign demand has been more subdued than expected. At the same time, the less-favourable prices received by Canadian energy producers, together with the continued elevated level of uncertainty, have led to slower growth in final domestic demand. As anticipated, Canadian households have shown a more cautious attitude toward spending.
 
The Bank projects a return to above-potential growth in the Canadian economy through 2013, supported in particular by rebounds in business fixed investment and exports. The projected level of exports nonetheless remains below its pre-recession peak until the second half of 2014, owing to the weak level of foreign demand and competitiveness challenges, including the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar. Growth in consumption is expected to be maintained at a moderate pace, while residential investment is still expected to decline from historically high levels. The Bank expects trend growth in household credit to moderate further, with the debt-to-income ratio stabilizing near current levels.
 
Although the Bank still sees a rebound in the growth of real GDP, economic activity in Canada is expected to be more restrained than projected in the October Report. As a result, the economy is now forecast to return to full capacity only in the second half of 2014.
 
Core inflation has softened more than the Bank had expected. More muted price pressures across a wide range of goods and services have been observed, consistent with the unexpected increase in excess capacity in the Canadian economy and greater competitive pressures among retailers. Total CPI inflation has also been lower than anticipated, reflecting developments in core inflation and weaker-than-projected gasoline prices. Total inflation is expected to remain around 1 per cent in the near term before rising gradually, along with core inflation, to the 2 per cent target in the second half of 2014 as the economy returns to full capacity and inflation expectations remain well anchored. This inflation projection is weaker than in the October Report, owing to greater excess supply in the Canadian economy over most of the projection horizon, as well as the anticipated persistence of recent relative price shocks in coming quarters.
 
Against a backdrop of some further improvement in global financial conditions, the supply and price of credit for businesses and households in Canada remain very stimulative, providing important ongoing support to the economic expansion.
 
Canadian financial markets have remained strong in recent months. Yields on both Canadian government and corporate bonds have stayed at exceptionally low levels, partly because of sustained international demand for the debt of Canadian governments, banks and corporations, a sign that their credit quality is perceived to be high by global standards. In this context, the volume of corporate bond issuance has picked up in recent months, and issuance for 2012 as a whole reached its highest level since 2007. Moreover, the S&P/TSX Composite Index has remained firm since the October Report, following significant gains during the summer months, and volatility has been relatively low.
 
Canadian banks continue to be well positioned to lend, with ready access to low-cost funding across the term structure in both Canadian and foreign currencies. Responses to the Bank's latest Senior Loan Officer Survey and the balance of opinion of Canadian firms surveyed in the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey together suggest that business-lending conditions have changed little in recent months, following a period of almost uninterrupted easing since late 2009.
 
With highly favourable financing conditions for Canadian firms, the pace of expansion of overall business credit has picked up to a rate well above its historical average. While this is consistent with a return to more rapid growth in business fixed investment, the pickup in business credit growth can be partly explained by transitory influences. These include an increase in the need for working capital due to higher inventories and the early refinancing of corporate debt at favourable interest rate levels.
 
Household credit continues to be readily available at near-record low rates. The growth of household credit has nonetheless slowed from around 5.5 per cent through much of 2012 to just above 3 per cent in the three months to November. This is the lowest rate of growth since 1999, and reflects a slowdown in the growth of both residential mortgage and consumer credit.
 
A number of factors have contributed to the slowing trend in household credit growth to slightly below 5 per cent on a year-over-year basis from a peak of over 12 per cent in 2008. These factors include the consequences of the pulling forward of housing activity due to improved affordability, the cumulative effects of changes to mortgage insurance rules and the tightening of mortgage underwriting guidelines, and increasing consumer appreciation of the dangers of elevated debt levels. Even with the recent slowing, household credit still grew slightly faster than disposable income in the third quarter, resulting in a further rise in the aggregate household debt-to-income  ratio to 165 per cent. The Bank expects trend growth in household credit to moderate further, with the debt-to-income ratio stabilizing near current levels.
 
Despite the continued high level of uncertainty surrounding the global economic outlook and the associated preference for liquidity, growth in the narrow monetary aggregates has slowed considerably in recent months, coinciding with the weak GDP growth registered in the second half of 2012. Growth in the broad monetary aggregates has also moderated and is consistent with subdued inflationary pressures ahead.
 
Various indicators point to an increase in excess capacity in the Canadian economy through the second half of 2012. Real GDP growth slowed slightly more than expected to 0.6 per cent in the third quarter, and is estimated to have been 1.0 per cent in the fourth quarter, significantly below the October forecast. Exports and business fixed investment were particularly weak, offset somewhat by an unexpectedly large rise in inventory investment. Largely as a result, the level of real GDP at the end of 2012 is 0.6 per cent below that expected in the October Report. Consistent with these dynamics, the Bank's conventional measure of the output gap widened to -1.1 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2012.
 
Responses to the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey also point to a recent increase in economic slack. The proportion of firms that would have difficulty meeting an unexpected increase in demand has fallen sharply, albeit from a level around its historical average in recent quarters. The proportion of firms reporting labour shortages has also declined, to a level well below its historical average.
 
In contrast, labour market indicators more broadly do not suggest an increase in the degree of excess capacity in the Canadian economy in recent quarters. With solid gains in employment, the unemployment rate has edged down in recent months, to a level consistent with a modest degree of slack in the economy. Nonetheless, the average duration of unemployment and the proportion of involuntary part-time workers have remained at elevated levels, while average hours worked remain relatively low. Wage growth has also continued to be moderate, consistent with the persistence of slack in the labour market.
 
On balance, the Bank judges that the economy was operating about 1 per cent below its production capacity in the fourth quarter of 2012, a larger degree of slack than expected in October.
 
The Bank expects growth in the Canadian economy to pick up this year. The anticipated rebound through the first half of the year mainly reflects stronger foreign demand and the unwinding of temporary factors that restrained activity in the resource sector in the second half of 2012. Consumption is expected to grow at a moderate pace, while business fixed investment accelerates. The Bank projects that net exports will contribute positively to GDP growth in 2013 and 2014 after unexpectedly detracting from growth in 2012. This contribution is nevertheless modest, reflecting the persistence of external headwinds.
 
On an average annual basis, real GDP is forecast to grow by 2.0 per cent in 2013, up slightly from 1.9 per cent in 2012. With the quarterly pace of growth rising through 2013, average annual growth of 2.7 per cent is projected in 2014. The level of economic activity is lower than in the October Report through most of the projection period. Final domestic demand has been revised down, mainly reflecting the adverse impact on business fixed investment of more persistent uncertainty regarding the global economic outlook and less-favourable terms of trade. The profile for exports is also revised down relative to the October Report as a result of the downward revision to foreign activity, although imports are also weaker than previously anticipated.
 
Growth in household spending proceeded at a moderate pace in the second half of 2012, broadly in line with expectations. Consumption picked up following weakness in the first half of the year, with a rebound in purchases of motor vehicles and stronger growth in spending by Canadian consumers abroad. In contrast, housing investment began to decline from historically high levels. Sales of existing homes have fallen, partly because of measures taken by federal authorities. Housing starts have also declined from very high levels, decreasing from roughly 225,000 units through much of 2012 to about 200,000 units in November and December. However, home building still remains above demographic demand, which is estimated at around 185,000. Ongoing strong rates of construction, particularly of multiple-unit dwellings in some regions, continue to point to overbuilding. Despite some softening in house prices, valuations in some segments of the housing market remain stretched.
 
The outlook for household spending is broadly unchanged from the October Report, although there is a slight dampening impact from the less-favourable terms of trade and associated income and wealth effects. The Bank's outlook for growth in household spending continues to include some ongoing restraint by Canadian households related to high levels of debt. Consumption is expected to grow at a moderate rate, somewhat below that of disposable income, resulting in a further slight increase in the personal savings rate. Residential investment is projected to continue to contract, with its share of the overall economy declining gradually over the projection horizon.
 
Growth in business fixed investment is expected to return gradually to a more solid pace through 2013, following unexpected weakness in the second half of 2012, which was primarily concentrated in engineering activity related to the energy sector. The outlook for investment continues to be supported by the strong aggregate financial position of Canadian firms, favourable credit conditions, relatively high commodity prices and the strong Canadian dollar, as well as the impetus to improve productivity amid heightened pressures to become more competitive. Expectations of a pickup in business fixed investment in coming quarters are further supported by the return to a more positive balance of opinion about spending on machinery and equipment in the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey, by the acceleration in business credit, and by recent trends in industrial and commercial building permits. Nonetheless, the factors that weighed on investment growth in the second half of 2012 are expected to persist for some time. These include elevated uncertainty about the global economic outlook, lower energy prices received by Canadian producers and the softness in domestic demand. As a result, the projected profile for business fixed investment is lower than in the October Report.
 
Government spending is expected to contribute only modestly to real GDP growth over the projection horizon. As in October, this contribution is considerably weaker than has been typical historically, in line with the plans of federal and provincial governments to consolidate spending.
 
The recovery in net exports is expected to remain weak, although the Bank continues to anticipate some improvement over the projection horizon. Exports contracted unexpectedly in the second half of 2012, reflecting weaker-than-anticipated foreign demand as well as temporary disruptions in the energy sector. Some rebound in exports is expected in coming quarters, consistent with the projected reacceleration in the foreign activity measure. Nevertheless, the growth of exports remains more moderate than that of foreign activity, owing to ongoing competitiveness challenges, including the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar, which is being influenced by safe-haven flows and spillovers from global monetary policy. As a result, the level of Canada's exports is not forecast to regain its pre-recession peak until the second half of 2014.
 
The profile for imports has also been revised down, owing to the weaker outlook for business investment and exports. In contrast to exports, the level of imports had already returned to its pre-recession peak by the first quarter of 2011. Partly as a result, Canada's current account balance has declined from a surplus position before the recession to a deficit of around 4 per cent of GDP. This sizable current account deficit is projected to diminish gradually over the forecast horizon owing to modest improvements in the real trade balance and the terms of trade.
 
Given the above projection for real GDP, the Canadian economy is expected to reach full capacity in the second half of 2014, later than anticipated in the October Report.
 
Core CPI inflation moderated to an average of 1.3 per cent in October and November from an average of 1.5 per cent in the third quarter and 2.0 per cent in the first half of 2012. Alternative measures of core inflation have also trended down. The decline in core CPI inflation has been larger than anticipated and reflects softer prices across a wide range of goods and services, consistent with the unexpected increase in excess capacity in the Canadian economy, as well as heightened competitive pressures among retailers. The greater-than-expected softness in core inflation has also reflected a number of idiosyncratic developments. Reported auto prices have been weaker in recent months than the typical seasonal pattern would suggest, reflecting in part a methodological change implemented by Statistics Canada. In addition, increases in regulated prices (such as auto insurance) have slowed more significantly than anticipated. The declines in inflation in food and clothing prices in response to the waning effects of prior increases in agricultural prices have also been larger than projected.
 
Total CPI inflation has also continued to ease in recent months, in contrast to the Bank's expectations in the October Report. This easing is due to softer core inflation, as well as weaker-than-expected gasoline prices, which in turn reflect both lower world prices for crude oil and lower margins.
 
Inflation expectations remain well anchored. As reported in the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey, almost all firms surveyed continue to expect average inflation over the next two years to remain within the 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range. The January Consensus Economics forecasts for total CPI inflation were 1.8 per cent in 2013 and 2.0 per cent in 2014. Market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations also continue to be consistent with the 2 per cent inflation-control target.
 
Core inflation is expected to remain subdued in coming quarters before rising gradually to reach 2 per cent in the second half of 2014, as economic slack is gradually absorbed and inflation expectations remain well anchored. In addition, growth in labour compensation is expected to stay moderate, consistent with recent trends in wage growth. This projection for core inflation is weaker than in the October Report, owing to greater-than-anticipated excess supply in the Canadian economy over most of the projection horizon, as well as the expected persistence of recent relative price shocks in coming quarters.
 
Total CPI inflation is projected to remain around 1 per cent over the near term. With the profile for core inflation weaker and futures prices suggesting similar oil prices to those assumed at the time of the October Report, the Bank now expects total CPI inflation to stay well below the 2 per cent target over most of the coming year before returning to target in the second half of 2014.
 
This projection includes a gradual reduction in monetary stimulus over the projection horizon, consistent with achieving the inflation target.
 
The uncertainty surrounding the Bank's inflation projection is illustrated using fan charts. Chart 38 and Chart 39 depict the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the first quarter of 2013 to the end of 2014.
 
While global tail risks have diminished as a result of a series of actions by European and American authorities, the inflation outlook in Canada is still subject to significant risks.
 
The three main upside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the possibility of stronger-than-expected growth in the US economy, higher Canadian exports and renewed momentum in Canadian residential investment.
 
Private sector demand in the United States could be stronger than expected if the negative effects of policy uncertainty dissipate more rapidly or if household spending grows faster, given improvements in the housing market and the degree of deleveraging that has already taken place.
 
Growth in Canadian exports could be stronger than expected if exporters improve their competitiveness more rapidly than currently assumed or if global growth is stronger than projected. The unexpected contraction in exports in the second half of 2012 could also give way to a sharper rebound in 2013.
 
While residential investment in Canada has declined as expected after reaching record-high levels, it could regain momentum, adding to domestic demand for a time but reinforcing existing imbalances.
 
The three main downside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the European crisis, more protracted weakness in business investment and exports in Canada, and the possibility that growth in Canadian household spending could be weaker.
 
Although immediate risks have diminished, the policy challenges facing Europe remain considerable and a failure to contain the crisis remains the most serious risk facing the global and Canadian economies.
 
The projected pickup in Canadian economic growth in 2013 relies heavily on an improvement in business investment and net exports. There is a risk that the recent poor performance could be extended longer than expected, particularly if external demand is weaker or if commodity prices are less supportive.
 
Continuing high household debt levels in Canada could lead to weaker household spending. Relatedly, if there were a sudden weakening in the Canadian housing sector, it could have sizable spillover effects on other areas of the economy.
 
Overall, the Bank judges that the risks to the inflation outlook in Canada are roughly balanced over the projection period.