The global economic expansion is modest and uneven. After growing at a healthy pace in the second half of 2013, the world economy experienced a sharp and broad-based slowdown in economic activity and trade in the first quarter of this year. While global growth is expected to gather momentum, the resulting profile is weaker than anticipated at the time of the April Report. Global economic growth is expected to be 2.9 per cent in 2014, picking up to 3.6 per cent in 2015 and 3.7 per cent in 2016.
 
The global expansion has been held back for the past several years by three headwinds. Two headwinds, associated with fiscal consolidation and private sector deleveraging, are already diminishing. The third, related to uncertainty surrounding economic policies and economic prospects more generally, is lingering, as evidenced by the serial disappointment in global growth over recent years. Over time, this headwind is also expected to dissipate and the global expansion to continue, supported by highly accommodative monetary policies and increasingly buoyant financial conditions.
 
The global economy experienced a widespread slowdown in activity, investment and trade in the first quarter, reflecting the coincident occurrence of a diverse set of country-specific factors. In particular, real US GDP contracted by 2.9 per cent, partly due to temporary and one-off factors, such as a slowdown in inventory investment, the expiration of fiscal measures (for example, extended unemployment benefits) at the beginning of 2014 and severe winter weather. Nevertheless, these factors can only partially explain the broad-based weakness in the first quarter, suggesting that there is less underlying momentum in the US economy.
 
Economic activity in the euro area continued to expand modestly in the first quarter. Growth was uneven, with the strength in Germany offset by contracting or stagnant activity in many other countries. In contrast, real GDP in Japan jumped sharply in the first quarter, but this reflected a pulling forward of growth before the April increase in the value-added tax from 5 per cent to 8 per cent.
 
In China, growth slowed to its weakest pace since 2009. Meanwhile, in other emerging-market economies , activity was weighed down by political uncertainty in several regions and tightening financial conditions.
 
Many of the factors contributing to slower growth in the first quarter appear to be country-specific and their effects are likely to be transitory. The conditions supporting a rebound in global activity remain in place, albeit starting from a weaker level of activity than previously expected. The widespread nature of the slowdown, however, suggests that there could be less underlying momentum in the global economy.
 
Most of the factors restraining the pace of the global economic expansion in recent years have dissipated further, although some continue to have an impact. Fiscal drag is diminishing significantly in many advanced economies. Household deleveraging in the United States and some other countries is well advanced, which should support domestic demand. At the same time, uncertainty appears to be undermining business confidence and restraining investment. Such uncertainty is expected to dissipate as the recovery strengthens - boosting investment and thus putting international trade and commodity prices on a firmer footing - although that has yet to happen. Bottlenecks and other structural impediments that are hindering growth in the EMEs are also expected to be mitigated by ongoing economic reforms.
 
Global financial conditions have become even more buoyant since the last Report. These conditions reflect the exceptionally stimulative monetary policies in the major advanced economies, which, in some cases, eased further during this period. In June, in response to declining inflation, weak growth and ongoing financial fragmentation, the European Central Bank announced further stimulus measures, lowering its main interest rate to 0.15 per cent and introducing a negative deposit rate. The ECB also stated that it will implement targeted credit measures. Meanwhile, central bank balance sheets continue to expand in some countries. In the United States, although the Federal Reserve continues  to reduce the size of its asset purchases, its balance sheet is still expanding, providing additional monetary stimulus. Moreover, the Federal Open Market Committee has reiterated its expectations that economic conditions may warrant monetary policy remaining accommodative "even after employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels."
 
In this context, market expectations that policy interest rates will remain low for an extended period, the search for yield and an increase in the demand for safe assets by banks are also exerting downward pressure on long-term interest rates. Stock markets are at or near recent highs, credit spreads have narrowed, and issuance remains robust. Furthermore, measures of market volatility - both forward-looking and realized - have fallen further below historical averages across a range of asset classes. After tightening in the first quarter, financial conditions in EMEs have also improved, with strengthening equity markets and narrowing spreads.
 
Led by the United States, growth in the advanced economies is expected to bounce back and strengthen through 2014. The rebound is not anticipated to make up for the weakness in the first quarter, however, leaving the level of GDP on a lower path than assumed in the April Report. Over time, the expansion in the advanced economies is anticipated to return their economies to potential and enable them to achieve natural growth that is no longer reliant on exceptional monetary policy stimulus.
 
Domestic demand in the United States is expected to pick up, underpinned by an expansion of credit, rising financial and housing wealth, and improving labour market conditions. Specifically, consumption will be supported by growing household net worth and a gradual increase in disposable income. Residential investment is also expected to benefit from these factors, together with a rise in household formation and a gradual easing in credit standards as the competition for new mortgage lending intensifies. Recent labour market indicators have been encouraging, with roughly 230,000 net new jobs created, on average, over the past six months; job openings rising to their highest level since August 2007; and the unemployment rate declining to 6.1 per cent. Despite these improvements, other labour market indicators, such as modest wage growth and elevated long-term unemployment, suggest that there is still considerable slack in the labour market, which is projected to keep inflationary pressures contained.
 
Business investment is expected to strengthen as uncertainty about future demand diminishes, the cost of capital remains low and firms seek to put their ample cash holdings to work. That being said, momentum appears to be weaker than anticipated in April. For example, indicators such as construction spending and shipments of capital goods suggest a somewhat lower profile for business investment through 2014.
 
Overall, the US economy is expected to grow by around 1 1/2 per cent this year, before strengthening to around 3 per cent in 2015 and 2016, a lower rate of growth than anticipated at the time of the April Report.
 
The recovery in the euro area remains modest and fragile. Inflation has slowed and remains low, with concerns that it may fall further. Nevertheless, accommodative monetary conditions, particularly in view of the ECB's recent measures, combined with receding domestic headwinds and strengthening external demand, are expected to support the recovery in the euro area. Despite the progress to date, the path forward may be uneven, as some countries continue to rebalance their economies to improve their competitiveness.
 
Economic growth in China has continued to slow, reflecting the ongoing tension between rebalancing the economy and maintaining growth. These strains are most evident in the property sector, which is entering its third cyclical downturn in six years, with both sales and housing starts contracting significantly at the start of 2014. However, unlike in previous periods when policy was a key driver, the recent slowdown appears to reflect weakness in demand and excessive inventories.
 
Despite the downturn in the housing market, China's economic growth is expected to remain solid, supported by near-term targeted stimulus measures and ongoing medium-term economic reforms aimed at reorienting growth toward domestic consumption and away from investment and exports. The risk remains that the housing downturn could accelerate, adversely affecting China's shadow banking sector, which could then have broader spillover effects on the banking sector, the real economy and, in turn, on global commodity prices.
 
In the rest of the world, growth is expected to pick up to roughly 3 3/4 per cent in 2015 and 2016. The level of GDP is lower throughout the projection horizon, however, as a result of the weakness in the first quarter of this year. Economic activity in the EMEs (excluding China) is expected to lead the pickup, growing by more than 4 per cent as foreign demand strengthens, recent improvements in financial conditions pass through to domestic credit conditions and progress is made on economic reforms. Importantly, the emerging-market share of global GDP is expected to continue rising over the projection period, which, given their relatively higher commodity intensity, will support commodity prices.
 
Global crude oil prices have fluctuated in recent months, reflecting geopolitical developments. By convention, for the purposes of the economic projection, the Bank assumes that energy prices will remain near their recent levels. Prices for Brent, West Texas Intermediate and Western Canada Select have recently averaged roughly US$110, US$105 and US$85 per barrel, respectively.
 
Historical experience underscores the considerable uncertainty associated with crude oil prices. In the near term, crude prices could surprise on the upside, since rising sectarian violence in Iraq could reduce global oil supplies, especially given OPEC's already low level of spare capacity. In the medium term, however, the Bank's latest analysis of demand and supply factors suggests that the risks to oil prices are tilted to the downside. In particular, if shale oil production were to exceed current estimates and/or geopolitical tensions were resolved, prices would likely fall below the level assumed in the Bank's base-case scenario.
 
Since the April Report, the prices of many non-energy commodities have risen. In most cases, these increases are a reflection of supply developments rather than of a strengthening global economy. The rise in agricultural prices has been driven by a surge in cattle prices, owing to extremely tight supplies, since US cattle stocks have fallen to the lowest level in more than five decades. Lumber prices have recovered some of their previous decline as US housing construction bounced back from the effects of the severe winter, even though some previously unused production capacity has been coming on stream. Meanwhile, the rise in base metals prices has been widespread and may be a sign of improving  growth prospects. However, supply-related issues, particularly the Indonesian ban on exports of metal ores, have also pushed up prices. The prices of non-energy commodities are expected to rise as uncertainty wanes and the global economic expansion gains momentum.
 
The global economy has continued to disappoint, reflecting the pervasive uncertainty that continues to hold back activity, investment and trade. Nevertheless, global economic growth is expected to strengthen as the underlying forces of natural growth gradually assert themselves, supporting Canadian exports, commodity prices and terms of trade. Overall, however, the level of global economic activity is judged to be weaker over the projection horizon than anticipated in the April Report.
 
The Canadian dollar has averaged 93 cents since the June fixed announcement date, higher than the 91 cents assumed in April. By convention, the Canadian dollar is assumed to remain at its recent level of 93 cents over the projection horizon.
 
Total CPI inflation has moved up to around the 2 per cent target in recent months. Core inflation has also increased, but remains below 2 per cent. Although the Bank had anticipated in the April Report that higher consumer energy prices and exchange rate pass-through would exert temporary upward pressure on inflation, the increase occurred sooner and has been larger than anticipated. The higher-than-expected inflation readings primarily reflect larger increases in energy prices, which are notoriously volatile, as well as other sector-specific factors that have temporarily affected core inflation.
 
The Bank's judgment is that underlying inflationary pressures remain muted, given the persistent slack in the economy and continued intense competition in the retail sector. In light of the weaker global outlook, the Bank now estimates that it will take a little longer than expected in April for the Canadian economy to return to full capacity.
 
Inflation is expected to fluctuate close to 2 per cent over the next two years as the temporary boost to inflation from the relative price shocks noted above eases and the downward pressure on inflation arising from excess supply and heightened retail competition gradually dissipates. As the economy reaches its full capacity around mid-2016, both core and total CPI inflation are projected to converge on 2 per cent on a sustained basis. Beyond the near term, the inflation projection is little changed from the April Report.
 
Canadian real GDP growth is projected to average around 2 1/4 per cent during 2014-16. The abrupt slowing in global economic growth in the first quarter has once again delayed the expected pickup in exports and business investment. However, the Bank continues to expect that the lower Canadian dollar and the projected strengthening of the global economy will lead to a broadening of the composition of growth in Canada. Meanwhile, the Bank still anticipates a soft landing in the housing market and a continued constructive evolution of household imbalances. Given the downgrade to the global economic outlook, economic activity in Canada is now projected to be a little weaker than previously expected.
 
Inflation has risen in recent months, owing to the temporary effects of higher energy prices and exchange rate pass-through, as well as certain other sector-specific shocks. All of these factors are providing a one-time boost to the level of prices, which will drop out of the year-over-year inflation rate during 2015. At the same time, persistent excess capacity in the economy and heightened competition in the retail sector are continuing to exert downward pressure on inflation. The Bank estimates that these two factors are currently subtracting about 0.3 percentage points each from the annual rate of core inflation.
 
After fluctuating in a very narrow range around 1.2 per cent from January 2013 through March 2014, core inflation rose to an average of 1.6 per cent in April and May. While monthly inflation has picked up markedly in the past six months, this is mainly the result of larger price increases in categories that are not believed to be affected by the degree of slack or competition in the Canadian economy.  For example, tight supply conditions in North America have caused meat prices to soar. In addition, there has been a rapid rise in electricity rates (included in the core measure). While there is obviously some uncertainty and there may be some upside risk to the near-term path, the Bank does not expect the recent momentum in monthly inflation to persist. This is in part because the price increases in the sectors responsible for the pickup are currently above their historical averages and tend to exhibit low inflation persistence, suggesting that they will subside quickly going forward. This is illustrated in Chart 12.The rise in total CPI inflation over the same period has been more pronounced than that of core inflation, owing to large increases in the prices for gasoline and natural gas.
 
Relative to the April Report, the higher-than-expected readings for core inflation mainly reflect larger increases in the prices for semi-durables, such as clothing and footwear, and food (in particular, meat). In addition to higher core inflation, the positive shock to total CPI inflation reflects higher-than-expected gasoline prices.
 
The depreciation of the Canadian dollar since the beginning of 2013 has put some temporary upward pressure on inflation as higher import prices have been "passed through" to domestic consumer prices. Both the magnitude and the timing of the direct impact of the exchange rate on core inflation are difficult to measure with precision. The impact varies across businesses, depending on a number of factors, including import concentration and the duration of currency hedges. The Bank's latest Business Outlook Survey suggests that some firms have already seen the effects of the exchange rate depreciation filter through to the cost of their inputs, while others expect to see these effects over coming quarters. The pass-through can be inferred by examining the evolution of inflation for goods with high import content. Over the past six months, core goods with higher import content - particularly clothing and footwear-have registered larger price increases than those with lower import content.
 
Past exchange rate declines appear to be adding about 0.1 to 0.2 percentage points to core inflation at this time.  Since some of the key volatile components excluded from the core measure are more sensitive to exchange rate movements, the pass-through to total CPI inflation is estimated to be larger, at about 0.3 to 0.4 percentage points. In its base-case projection, the Bank assumes that the direct impact on the level of prices of the lower dollar will be complete by around the end of 2014. As a result, the impact on year-over-year inflation should dissipate by the end of next year.
 
As reflected in the Bank's base-case scenario, for inflation to be sustained at 2 per cent, excess capacity in the economy will have to be absorbed. Otherwise, inflation would drift back down and stay below 2 per cent.
 
The Bank estimates that the degree of excess capacity in the economy remained largely unchanged during the first half of 2014. Hampered by severe weather and supply constraints, real GDP in Canada grew at a modest pace in the first quarter. With the reversal of these temporary effects, growth is expected to rebound in the second quarter, leaving real GDP at about the same level as projected in the April Report. Taking into account the various indicators of capacity pressures and the uncertainty surrounding any point estimate, the Bank judges that the amount of excess capacity in the second quarter was between 1/2 per cent and 1 1/2 per cent.
 
Recent developments indicate that slack in the labour market is consistent with the material excess capacity in the economy. Over the past year, employment has been very weak, increasing on average by roughly 6,000 jobs per month, or less than half the rate that would be consistent with real GDP growing at potential. At around 7 per cent, the unemployment rate remains elevated and would have increased if not for the recent decline in the labour force participation rate of the prime-age group (25 to 54 years of age) from 86.6 per cent to 85.9 per cent over the past six months. Such a decline in the participation rate is roughly equivalent to 100,000 fewer people. In addition, in looking across various age groups, the participation rate of youth remains particularly low relative to its pre-recession peak. For this group, the decline in the participation rate from 68.1 per cent to 63.5 per cent is roughly equivalent to 200,000 fewer youth participating in the labour force today. For reference, the decline in the prime-age participation rate from its pre-recession peak of 86.7 per cent to 85.9 per cent is considerably smaller, but because this group has a larger population, it translates into a reduction in the labour force of about 120,000. Continuing labour market slack is also reflected in subdued increases in wages.
 
Canadian exports of energy products increased further in the first quarter, while non-energy exports continued to disappoint, falling by more than the Bank's trade-weighted foreign activity measure. However, non-energy exports appear to have rebounded sharply in the second quarter. The Bank's outlook for exports balances these initial positive signs against the lower path of global activity over the projection horizon. Overall, moderate export growth is expected as foreign activity strengthens and the competitiveness of Canadian firms benefits from a lower Canadian dollar.
 
Bank analysis has found that, in many non-energy subsectors (which account for about half of the value of non-energy exports), exports have been behaving broadly in line with, or better than, the indicators of foreign demand since 2000. Therefore, as US activity strengthens - and with support from the lower exchange rate - these subsectors, including building and packaging materials, machinery and equipment, commercial services, and aircraft and aircraft parts, are expected to benefit. In contrast, some sectors that have been facing longer-term challenges may need a lengthier adjustment period and more investment to regain productivity and competitiveness.
 
Healthy corporate balance sheets and the low cost and high availability of capital are providing solid support to firms. The Bank's most recent Business Outlook and Senior Loan Officer surveys point to a further easing in credit conditions. Business sentiment - particularly among exporters - is also showing tentative signs of improvement. For example, the Conference Board of Canada's Index of Business Confidence edged up in the first quarter and remains above its historical average, and Export Development Canada's Trade Confidence Index has reached its highest level since spring 2010. According to the Bank's summer Business Outlook Survey, firms' expectations for future sales growth remain positive, and there are indications of a gradual improvement in business sentiment regarding exports. As well, the summer survey continues to point to an increase in business investment over the next 12 months, with a number of exporting firms looking to improve their competitiveness over the longer term. Consistent with rising prices for non-energy commodities, Canada's terms of trade should improve further and provide additional support to business investment.
 
On balance, however, the growth profiles for exports and business investment have been revised down relative to the April Report as a result of the weaker level of activity in the global economy. Energy exports are expected to outpace foreign activity, reflecting announced plans by major producers to increase output, the growing use of Canadian heavy oil in US refineries and additional rail transportation capacity. The recovery in exports over the projection horizon will continue to be drawn out: the expected strong growth in energy exports and the return of growth to non-energy exports will not be sufficient to fill the shortfall left by the weak performance of non-energy exports relative to foreign activity since the end of 2011.
 
Recent developments in the housing market have been broadly consistent with a soft landing. The trend in housing starts and building permits remains roughly in line with demographic demand. Builders' inventories are showing signs of easing. The recent pickup in construction reflects a rebound from weather-depressed levels in the first quarter and also indicates strong activity in Alberta. While the weather likely explains most of the rebound in resale transactions in recent months, its magnitude and broad-based nature leave open the possibility of renewed momentum in the resale market. In addition, existing home prices have continued to rise at a faster pace than disposable income. Compared with a year ago, the growth in house prices has been particularly strong in Vancouver, Calgary and the Toronto region. While there are risks in both directions, the Bank continues to expect that the level of residential investment will be relatively unchanged over the projection horizon and that its share of the overall economy will decline to a more sustainable level.
 
The Bank expects moderate growth in consumer spending over the projection horizon, broadly in line with the growth of household disposable income and supported by improvements in Canada's terms of trade. Household credit is expected to continue growing at a rate well below its historical average, but at a pace similar to that of disposable income. Consequently, the ratio of household debt to disposable income is expected to stabilize and the savings rate to remain within recent ranges.
 
While current developments are consistent with an ongoing constructive evolution of household imbalances, vulnerabilities in the household sector that stem from stretched valuations in the housing market and elevated indebtedness remain important. The Bank's June Financial System Review provides a more in-depth assessment of these and other vulnerabilities.
 
For the inflation target to be achieved on a sustained basis, the economy will first have to reach and then remain at full capacity. On a quarterly basis, real GDP growth is projected to average between 2 1/4 and 2 1/2 per cent in both 2014 and 2015, before easing to about 2 per cent - the growth rate of the economy's potential output - by the end of 2016. The Bank expects that the economy will gradually return to its full production capacity over the next two years.
 
Given the degree of uncertainty inherent in projections, the Bank judges that annual GDP growth will likely be within ±0.5 percentage points of the base-case projection. In addition, there is always uncertainty surrounding the path of potential output growth. In part, this is because potential output responds gradually to shifts in aggregate demand through changes in business investment, firm creation and labour force participation.
 
The path of core inflation will reflect the outcome of various factors at play. The depreciation of the Canadian dollar over the past year and the effects of sector-specific shocks are expected to continue to put upward pressure on year-over-year core inflation until about the end of next year. In contrast, excess capacity in the economy and heightened competition in the retail sector are anticipated to continue to exert downward pressure on core inflation - although at a diminishing rate - over most of the projection horizon. As excess capacity in the economy is absorbed and the effects of heightened retail competition wane, core inflation is expected to stabilize at 2 per cent around mid-2016. However, anecdotal evidence suggests that the intense competitive pressures have led retailers to increase their investment in technologies to improve productivity and reduce costs, putting downward pressure on retail prices. If adoption of these technology improvements becomes more widespread, the disinflationary pressures could be larger or persist longer than currently assumed.
 
Total CPI inflation is forecast to remain slightly above core inflation through 2015, mainly reflecting higher energy prices. There is, as always, much uncertainty about the profile of the total CPI, since it incorporates movements in volatile energy components. For example, if the base-case scenario were to assume that oil prices were 10 per cent higher , total CPI inflation would be higher by 0.3 percentage points over the coming year.
 
Indicators of short-term inflation expectations are consistent with the Bank's projection. The June Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation was 1.8 per cent for 2014 and 2.0 per cent for 2015. According to the latest Business Outlook Survey, over 90 per cent of the firms surveyed expect inflation to be within the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range, with the majority expecting it to be in the bottom half of the range. Firms cite retail competition and subdued economic growth as factors that are expected to keep inflation low. Market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations also remain consistent with the 2 per cent target. With total CPI inflation now close to 2 per cent, the risk of a downward drift in inflation expectations has diminished.
 
Based on the past dispersion of private sector forecasts, a reasonable range around the base-case projection for total CPI inflation is ±0.3 percentage points.  This range is intended to convey a sense of forecast uncertainty. Fan charts, which are derived using statistical analysis of forecast errors from the Bank's projection models, provide a complementary perspective. Chart 18 and Chart 19 show the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the third quarter of 2014 to the end of 2016.
 
The outlook for inflation is subject to several risks emanating from both the external environment and the domestic economy. The Bank judges that the risks to the projected inflation path are roughly balanced.
 
The most important risks to inflation are the following:
 
The global economic outlook remains subject to a considerable degree of uncertainty. The widespread weakness in the first quarter provided yet another example of disappointment regarding global growth outcomes. Thus, a period of protracted global economic weakness associated with pervasive uncertainty, chronically deficient demand and weaker potential GDP growth remains possible. Alternatively, as the global economy rebounds, confidence could improve more rapidly, particularly in the United States, boosting investment and employment and spurring trade, leading to a virtuous circle of self-sustaining growth. These downside and upside risks to the global economy would be played out in parallel in Canada through impacts on commodity prices, Canadian exports, Canada's terms of trade and confidence effects on private domestic demand.
 
While a wide range of export sectors are expected to benefit from the continued strengthening of the US economy, a sustained rebound in non-energy exports has proven elusive. The precise timing of the realignment in growth is highly uncertain and could take longer than anticipated by the Bank. The risk of such a delay would be exacerbated if there were further losses of export competitiveness. A slower recovery in non-energy exports would also translate into slower growth in business investment, particularly investment in machinery and equipment. Together, weaker exports and business investment pose a downside risk to inflation.
 
Growth in EMEs could disappoint. In China, recent indicators point to a sharp slowdown in the housing sector. Beyond the direct effects of lower housing activity, this could also result in a greater-than-anticipated slowdown in credit growth and an extended period of deleveraging that would weigh on growth. There is also a risk that the weakness in other EMEs will persist longer than currently expected. In particular, political uncertainty could continue, undermining business confidence and delaying progress on economic reforms. These shocks could have negative spillover effects on the global economy and would be transmitted to the Canadian economy through weaker exports, lower commodity prices and a deterioration in the terms of trade.
 
Geopolitical events, such as the conflict in Iraq or a renewal of tensions in Libya, could lead to a significant supply disruption in oil markets. An intensification of these conflicts, or other events that could disrupt production, would put upward pressure on prices. If these events occurred, Canada's terms of trade would improve, providing modest support to wealth and consumer spending in Canada. This mildly favourable effect would be partly offset, however, by any adverse effects on global economic growth from an oil price shock.
 
While a soft landing in the housing market remains the most likely scenario, near record-high house prices and debt levels relative to income leave households vulnerable to adverse shocks. The recent rebound in housing activity is most likely only compensating for weakness in earlier months, but it could signal the beginning of a more persistent rise in housing activity and price pressures. Renewed momentum in residential investment would provide a temporary boost to economic activity, although it could also further exacerbate existing imbalances in the household sector and increase the likelihood and potential severity of a correction later on. A disorderly unwinding of household sector imbalances, should it materialize, could have sizable negative effects on other parts of the economy and on inflation.