The Canadian economy continues to adjust to developments in the global economy. These include stronger world demand, higher commodity prices, the realignment of world currencies - including the Canadian dollar - and the intensified competition, together with new trading opportunities, coming from emerging-market economies, such as China and India.
 
These developments require shifts in activity among sectors and create a need for adjustments by many businesses. Monetary policy is facilitating these adjustments by supporting aggregate demand, with the goal of keeping the economy near its full potential and inflation on target.
 
At the end of 2003, the Canadian economy was operating at a lower level than the Bank had projected in the October Monetary Policy Report. Although growth rebounded in the fourth quarter of last year, real GDP growth in the third quarter was weaker than had been expected, and there was a downward revision to GDP in the second quarter. This came about despite stronger global economic activity, particularly in the United States but also in Japan and other Asian economies, and strong increases in commodity prices. Preliminary indications are that growth in the first quarter of 2004 was marginally below 3 per cent at annual rates. As expected, core inflation has generally been below the Bank's 2 per cent target since the October Report.
 
Against this backdrop, the Bank lowered its key policy rate by a total of 75 basis points, reducing it by 25 basis points on each of the last three fixed announcement dates, to bring it to 2 per cent.
 
The Bank's outlook for economic growth and inflation in Canada is essentially unchanged from that of the January Monetary Policy Report Update. The Canadian economy is expected to grow at an annualized rate of about 2.75 per cent in 2004, picking up to about 3.75 per cent in 2005. Such growth would return the economy close to its production potential by the third quarter of next year. Core inflation is expected to average about 1.5 per cent for the rest of 2004 and to move back to the 2 per cent target by the end of next year.
 
The main uncertainty for the outlook continues to relate to how the Canadian economy adjusts to global developments. Overall, the risks to the outlook appear balanced.
 
The core rate of inflation fell in early 2004, and in February was well below the Bank's 2 per cent inflation-control target. The rate of increase in the total CPI came down even more, reflecting reductions in the prices of gasoline and fuel oil from year-earlier levels.
 
As expected at the time of the October Report, core CPI inflation fell in early 2004, as the effects of special factors came to an end. Between August and December of 2003, the core rate averaged 1.8 per cent, and by February it had decreased to 1.1 per cent. Other measures of the trend rate of inflation that the Bank follows closely have also fallen and in February were close to the core rate.
 
A temporary jump in the core rate in December 2003 was the result of Ontario electricity rebates at the end of 2002. In January and February of 2004, the core rate of inflation moved lower, since the effects from some special factors had, for the most part, ended. In particular, the effect of past substantial increases in auto insurance premiums, which had boosted the year-over-year rate of increase in the core CPI for some time, diminished significantly. The rate of increase in the food component of the core CPI also came down early this year, partly reflecting the impact of the Canadian dollar's appreciation since early 2003. Core inflation is expected to settle around 1.5 per cent in the second quarter of 2004.
 
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was 0.7 per cent in February, down from 2.0 per cent in August. This drop relative to the core rate was chiefly due to reductions in the consumer prices of gasoline and fuel oil from their levels a year earlier, as well as a marked easing in the year-to-year increase in the consumer price of natural gas. The price of crude oil has strengthened considerably since mid-October, however, reflecting strong Asian demand and the impact of relatively severe winter weather conditions on North American stocks. As a result, the price of oil is currently well above that in the base-case assumption used in the last Report.
 
Canada's real GDP grew at an annual rate of 1.3 per cent in the third quarter of 2003, somewhat less than had been expected in the October Report. In the fourth quarter, economic growth picked up to an annual rate of 3.8 per cent, about the same as anticipated in the last Report and in the January Update, although final domestic demand was slightly weaker than expected and external demand was slightly stronger. Recent indicators for spending and activity suggest that economic growth will be about 2.75 per cent in the first quarter of 2004, marginally weaker than anticipated in the January Update.
 
Growth in the third quarter of 2003 was held back as manufacturers and retailers undertook sharp inventory corrections. Economic activity was also adversely affected by the August blackout in Ontario and by the closure of international borders to imports of Canadian cattle, beef, and related products after the discovery of one case of bovine spongiform encephalopathy last May. At the same time, final domestic demand rose strongly. Business investment surged, and household spending rose substantially, reflecting continuing monetary stimulus, a high level of consumer confidence, and the effects of price discounting.
 
A pickup in inventory investment, together with some recovery from the earlier unusual shocks, contributed importantly to the resurgence in growth towards year-end. Exports also rebounded in the fourth quarter of 2003 as a result of the strengthening global economic recovery. However, imports increased even more strongly, and growth in final domestic demand slowed from its rapid pace in the third quarter.
 
In the United States, an upswing in household spending on housing and consumption and in business spending on equipment and software led to strong growth of real GDP in the second half of 2003 (8.2 and 4.1 per cent in the third and fourth quarters, respectively). Based on preliminary information, additional household spending, strong business expenditures, and significant restocking of inventories should result in growth of about 4.5 per cent in the first quarter of 2004.
 
Among the key global developments affecting the Canadian economy in 2003 and early 2004 has been the marked realignment of world currencies, including the Canadian dollar. At the same time, there has been a significant strengthening in the pace of global economic growth, especially in the United States and in most Asian economies, and a rebound in world commodity prices. The growing presence of China and India on the global scene is also a factor at play. The implications of these global changes for the demand for Canadian products will require shifts in activity among sectors and significant adjustments by many firms.
 
The rise in the Canadian dollar implies that economic growth in Canada will rely largely on domestic demand. Indeed, economic activity in the last quarter of 2003 and in early 2004 appears to have been held back by the impact of the Canadian dollar's appreciation on real net exports. In addition, there are likely to be shifts in activity towards the export of commodities and away from the export of highly manufactured products. Moreover, some Canadian exporters are likely to shift towards markets in countries whose currencies have appreciated significantly in relation to the US dollar. The reduction in the cost of machinery and equipment imported from the United States should help boost capital spending and improve Canadian productivity. Finally, firms will develop new supply chains and new niches for their own products and services in response to changing global markets.
 
Some of the economic adjustments in Canada caused by the key global changes became evident in 2003, although most of these shifts in activity across sectors are still to come. While overall corporate profitability remained high through 2003, profits have tended to weaken in those sectors with high exposure to international competition. Output growth was also stronger, and employment tended to rise, on average, in those industries producing commodities or having low exposure to foreign competition.
 
The Bank's most recent industry survey, completed in March, provides further evidence that changes in response to global developments have begun. Firms seemed somewhat more confident in their ability to adjust to the appreciation of the Canadian dollar. Many adversely affected firms have initiated measures to alleviate the impact of the higher dollar, chiefly through cost-cutting measures and improvements to productivity. In contrast, businesses favourably affected by the higher value of the dollar (mainly through lower costs for imported inputs) have responded, in some cases, by reducing their selling prices in Canada, although many used the opportunity to improve their profit margins. Companies that were adversely affected by the rise in the Canadian dollar were generally as optimistic as other firms regarding prospects for improved sales growth, but were markedly less sanguine about their hiring and investment intentions.
 
Estimates of the Bank's conventional measures of potential output and the output gap suggest that the level of economic activity has been below potential since the second quarter of 2003. While the output gap decreased somewhat in the fourth quarter, significant excess supply remains. With a downward revision to Canadian GDP data in the second quarter of 2003 and lower-than-expected growth in the second half of that year, the estimated output gap at year-end was somewhat larger than projected in the last Report.
 
Several indicators are consistent with the view that economic slack has opened up since early 2003. In the most recent survey conducted by the Bank's regional offices, the proportion of firms reporting pressures on capacity has decreased relative to indications at the beginning of 2003. As well, core inflation has moved below the 2 per cent target. On the other hand, capacity utilization in the non-farm, goods-producing sector in the fourth quarter of 2003 was, on balance, largely unchanged from levels early in the year, and about the same as its 2000-2003 average.
 
Based on an analysis of all the indicators of capacity pressures, the Bank judges that there is currently more excess supply in the Canadian economy than indicated by its conventional measure. However, there is more uncertainty than usual around estimates of the output gap, because it is harder to pin down effective capacity in times of demand-driven shifts in sectoral activity.
 
Unit labour costs in the business sector in the fourth quarter of 2003 were virtually unchanged from year-earlier levels, even though there was only a small rise in productivity over the past year. This resulted from the fact that hourly labour compensation in the business sector was little changed between the fourth quarter of 2002 and the fourth quarter of 2003. This weakness in the rate of increase of compensation was particularly pronounced in sectors adversely affected by the series of unusual shocks that hit the Canadian economy in 2003 and is therefore likely to prove temporary. Indeed, the underlying rate of increase in wages, based on such measures as the average hourly earnings of permanent workers, seems to have moved up to about 2.75 per cent since mid-2003.
 
The substantial year-over-year increases in the global prices of Canada's commodity exports during 2003 pushed the annual rise in the chain price index for GDP (a broad price measure of the goods and services produced in Canada) above the core rate of inflation last year. The prices of non-energy commodities have risen further since the end of 2003. Strong Asian demand has helped maintain the prices of both metals and grains at high levels. At the same time, expectations of continued strong demand for housing in North America for 2004 and a desire by US lumber wholesalers to restore inventories to more normal levels contributed to a sharp rise in lumber prices.
 
Financial conditions in Canada, as in the rest of the world generally, have continued the improvement noted in the October Report. Stock markets have strengthened further, corporate bond spreads are narrower, and the yield curve has shifted down. The financial situations and profitability of banks in Canada remain healthy - a positive sign for future credit conditions - and there is an abundance of liquidity.
 
Credit demand by non-financial businesses picked up in the past few months but remains modest, since growth in earnings has allowed businesses to finance most of their investment needs with internal funds. Longer-term business credit, buoyed by the strong issuance of bonds and the income-trust component of equities, has grown at a solid pace, but short-term credit remains below levels of a year ago.
 
Household credit is still expanding at a rapid pace, reflecting consumer spending and activity in the housing market. Low interest rates have held debt-service ratios at low levels, and rising house prices have supported household balance sheets. This suggests that household finances should not be a drag on economic growth in the period ahead.
 
The yield curve in Canada has shifted down since the October Report. At shorter maturities, this movement reflected both the actual and anticipated lowering of policy rates.
 
Yield spreads between Canadian and US bonds at shorter maturities narrowed sharply in the period between October and February, as interest rates fell in Canada while yields on US Treasuries remained fairly stable. This narrowing in spreads was particularly pronounced for 2-year maturities. Since February, spreads have remained relatively stable.
 
The period from October to January saw broad-based weakness in the US dollar relative to most currencies. In this context, the Canadian dollar touched a 10-year high of 78.86 cents US in early January. Since then, many currencies, including the Canadian dollar, have traded in fairly wide but more stable ranges. The Canadian dollar traded in a range of 74.5 to 76.5 cents US, similar to the level at the time of the October Report.
 
The recovery in global economic activity is broadening and gaining momentum. This is reflected in both official and private sector forecasts. This recovery is strongly supported by expansionary fiscal and monetary policies in many countries. It is also being driven by the continuing integration into the world economy of major emerging-market economies such as China and India. Indeed, the contribution of China and newly industrialized Asian economies to projected world economic growth is larger than that of the United States.
 
Short-term prospects for strong growth in the United States have improved. The Bank expects to see growth of about 5 per cent in 2004 and 4.5 per cent in 2005. The main drivers of US growth will be robust investment and consumer spending. Firms are expected to plow back their profits to meet anticipated demand and replenish their inventories. And households will benefit from tax rebates and projected employment gains. However, should they persist, high oil prices would dampen US growth prospects over the next two years.
 
Although much remains to be done in terms of economic and financial reform, a sustained recovery in Japan may be in progress boosted by strong exports and investment. While prospects appear to be improving in the euro area, the near-term outlook remains subdued. In contrast, the U.K. economy is operating at close to full capacity. Among emerging markets, growth prospects for China and India are very favourable.
 
While the short-term outlook is clearly more positive, risks and uncertainties remain as we look further out. It is unclear, for example, whether the large fiscal and current account imbalances in many major economies will be resolved in a way that maintains growth.
 
The expected strong economic expansion, especially in various Asian economies, should continue to support the price of non-energy commodities over the remainder of 2004 and through 2005. With regard to crude oil, the Bank's base-case scenario assumes that prices will ease to about US$32 per barrel by the middle of this year and remain there through mid-2005. Natural gas prices are expected to stay near their current high levels throughout 2004. These assumptions, based on current futures prices, are significantly above the levels of six months ago.
 
Economic growth in Canada in 2004 and 2005 is expected to come primarily from private domestic demand, supported by the degree of monetary stimulus and high levels of business and consumer confidence. The expanding global economy and the resulting high level of commodity prices, the contribution of the higher Canadian dollar to reduced costs of imported machinery and equipment, and favourable financial conditions should all lead to robust growth in capital expenditures by businesses. And, despite some softening towards the end of 2003, household spending is still expected to grow solidly, with additional support from projected stronger gains in real incomes. Spending on goods and services by all levels of government is projected to rise moderately during this period.
 
Canadian exports are expected to receive continued support from further strong gains in US and global economic activity. Nonetheless, the lower value of the US dollar is expected to hold back the growth of Canada's exports and boost imports. Indeed, net exports are not expected to contribute to growth in 2004 and 2005.
 
The Bank's base-case outlook now projects real GDP growth, on an average annual basis, of about 2.75 per cent in 2004, picking up to about 3.75 per cent in 2005. While lower than that given in the October Report, the projection for 2004 is the same as that in the January Update. This projection for 2004 is also very close to the most recent average private sector forecast, while the Bank's growth projection for 2005 is slightly higher than the latest consensus outlook.
 
The Bank's projection assumes real GDP growth of about 2.75 per cent, at an annual rate, in the first half of 2004. This is expected to move up to about 3.5 per cent in the second half of this year and to peak around 4 per cent in the first half of 2005. This outlook for growth would imply little change in the output gap by the end of 2004, but by the third quarter of 2005 the economy should be operating near potential.
 
The main uncertainty for the outlook continues to relate to how the Canadian economy adjusts to global developments. Overall, the risks to the outlook appear balanced.
 
Most indicators of inflation expectations that the Bank follows have remained largely unchanged since mid-October, and many of the key medium - and longer-term measures remain close to 2 per cent. In the Conference Board of Canada's regular survey, reported in the winter issue of Index of Business Confidence, 84 per cent of respondents expected prices, in general, to rise over the next six months at a rate of 2 per cent or less, little changed from last autumn. As well, almost all firms in the Bank's latest regional survey expected CPI inflation to be within a range of 1 to 3 per cent, on average, over the next two years. Although the average private sector forecast for total CPI inflation in 2004 has edged down further to 1.4 per cent, the inflation forecast for 2005 is just under 2 per cent. Typical forecasts of longer-term inflation also remain very close to 2 per cent.
 
Growth in the narrow money aggregates - M1+, M1++ - has strengthened since the last Report, partly in response to the low interest rate environment. This robust growth is widespread across both household and business deposits. This is consistent with the near-term outlook and with the recent pickup in output growth.
 
The growth rate of the broad money aggregate, M2++, has risen somewhat since the last Report from relatively low levels. This upswing largely reflects the strong growth in narrow money. Also contributing was a shift back into equity-based mutual funds from other assets, reversing the trend of the past few months. Despite this recent pickup, continued weak growth in M2++ points to a downside risk for inflation.
 
The slack in product and labour markets is expected to keep inflation below longer-term expectations until mid-2005. This effect should gradually diminish, however, as the output gap closes. The rise in the Canadian dollar since early 2003 is also likely to continue to put a limited amount of downward pressure on the core rate over the remainder of 2004.
 
The core rate of inflation is expected to stay around 1 1/2 per cent through 2004, before gradually moving back to the 2 per cent target by the end of 2005.
 
The outlook for the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI is critically affected by developments in the markets for crude oil. With the substantial rise in the price of crude oil in recent months, total CPI inflation is expected to move somewhat above the core rate of inflation in the second quarter of 2004. If the WTI price of oil eases to about US$32 per barrel by mid-2004 and to US$30 per barrel by the second half of 2005, as suggested by futures prices, total CPI inflation should fall slightly below core inflation in 2005.