The global economic recovery is proceeding at a somewhat faster pace than the Bank had anticipated, although risks remain elevated. Private domestic demand in the United States has picked up and will be reinforced by recently announced monetary and fiscal stimulus. European growth has also been slightly stronger than anticipated. Ongoing challenges associated with sovereign and bank balance sheets will limit the pace of the European recovery and are a significant source of uncertainty to the global outlook. In response to overheating, some emerging markets have begun to implement more restrictive policy measures. Their effectiveness will influence the path of commodity prices, which have increased significantly since the October Monetary Policy Report, largely reflecting stronger global growth.
 
The recovery in Canada is proceeding broadly as anticipated, with a period of more modest growth and the beginning of the expected rebalancing of demand. The contribution of government spending is expected to wind down this year, consistent with announced fiscal plans. Stretched household balance sheets are expected to restrain the pace of consumption growth and residential investment. In contrast, business investment will likely continue to rebound strongly, owing to stimulative financial conditions and competitive imperatives. Net exports are projected to contribute more to growth going forward, supported by stronger US activity and global demand for commodities. However, the cumulative effects of the persistent strength in the Canadian dollar and Canada's poor relative productivity performance are restraining this recovery in net exports and contributing to a widening of Canada's current account deficit to a 20-year high.
 
Overall, the Bank projects the economy will expand by 2.4В per cent in 2011 and 2.8В per cent in 2012 - a slightly firmer profile than had been anticipated in October. With a little more excess supply in the near term, the Bank continues to expect that the economy will return to full capacity by the end of 2012.
 
Underlying pressures affecting prices remain subdued, reflecting the considerable slack in the Canadian economy. Core inflation is projected to edge gradually up to 2В per cent by the end of 2012, as excess supply in the economy is slowly absorbed. Inflation expectations remain well anchored. Total CPI inflation is being boosted temporarily by the effects of provincial indirect taxes, but is expected to converge to the 2В per cent target by the end of 2012.
 
Despite improvements in the outlook for the global and Canadian economies, risks to inflation remain elevated. There are two main upside risks to inflation, relating to higher commodity prices and the possibility of greater-than-projected momentum in the Canadian household sector.
 
There are two main downside risks to inflation, relating to Canadian competitiveness and the possibility of weaker-than-projected household expenditures in Canada.
 
In addition, challenges in Europe continue to be a significant source of uncertainty for the global outlook. A comprehensive solution to the sovereign debt and financial stability issues in a number of countries will be required.
 
The Bank judges that the risks to the inflation outlook are roughly balanced over the projection horizon.
 
Reflecting all of these factors, on 18В January 2011 the Bank decided to maintain the target for the overnight rate at 1 per cent. The Bank Rate is correspondingly 1В 1/4В per cent, and the deposit rate is 3/4В per cent. This leaves considerable monetary stimulus in place, consistent with achieving the 2В per cent inflation target in an environment of significant excess supply in Canada. Any further reduction in monetary policy stimulus would need to be carefully considered.
 
The global economic recovery is proceeding at a somewhat faster pace than anticipated in the October Monetary Policy Report. In the United States, private demand has picked up and will be reinforced by recently announced monetary and fiscal stimulus. Momentum in the emerging-market economies has been buoyed by solid increases in consumption and investment, as well as continuing strength in exports. Economic activity in the euro area has also been slightly stronger than expected.
 
Nonetheless, the global recovery continues to be affected by a number of significant challenges. The broad forces of household, bank and sovereign deleveraging will continue to restrain growth in many advanced economies. Ongoing balance-sheet repair and a weak labour market will dampen the recovery in US household expenditures, while in some European countries, more aggressive fiscal consolidation and renewed concerns about bank balance sheets and the sustainability of public finances are also expected to constrain growth. In contrast, many emerging-market economies are contending with excess demand and rising inflationary pressures. Their efforts to contain these pressures are being complicated in some cases by a lack of exchange rate flexibility.
 
Global economic growth continued at a steady pace during the second half of 2010 and has been somewhat stronger than expected at the time of the October Report. In the United States, despite weak labour market conditions, economic activity has gained some momentum, supported by a recovery in consumer and investment spending. Growth in Europe has also held up, in spite of heightened concerns about sovereign debt in several peripheral countries. Growth in Japan, in contrast, slowed sharply toward the end of 2010, following the unwinding of some fiscal support. The pace of economic activity in emerging-market economies also began to ease from high rates toward the end of 2010, reflecting the gradual withdrawal of fiscal and monetary stimulus. Nevertheless, these economies have accounted for the majority of global growth.
 
Owing to significant excess capacity, policy interest rates in the major advanced economies remain at or near historic lows, and underlying inflation pressures are subdued. In the United States, core consumer price inflation has reached record lows since the October Report. In contrast, inflation pressures in many emerging-market countries are rising in response to excess demand.
 
Real GDP in the United States grew at an annual rate of 2.6В per cent in the third quarter of 2010 and is estimated to have accelerated to 3.7 per cent in the fourth quarter, owing to a pickup in consumer spending and a large, but temporary, drop in oil imports. The strength in consumption in the fourth quarter was led by a surge in spending on durable goods, particularly on motor vehicles. Although the household savings rate has eased somewhat, it nevertheless remains at a level consistent with the rebuilding of household balance sheets over the medium term. Conditions in the US labour market remain challenging, with only one in seven of the jobs lost during the recession recovered so far, and long-term unemployment remaining near postwar highs.
 
US residential investment fell sharply in the second half of 2010, delaying the expected recovery of the housing sector. A high level of vacant housing units, the recent tightening in bank lending standards for mortgage loans and increases in mortgage interest rates continue to restrain residential investment. Delays in processing foreclosures related to procedural flaws are also likely to slow the adjustment of the housing market.
 
Although business investment in structures fell further in the third quarter, recent indicators suggest that the trough is close to being reached. In ­contrast, investment in equipment and software has recovered most of the ground lost through the recession as firms have sought to replace the capital that had depreciated and to improve competitiveness. The growth of exports gathered significant momentum during the second half of 2010, supported by strong demand from emerging-market economies, the depreciation of the US dollar over the past year and solid gains in productivity.
 
Toward year-end, in response to pronounced weakness in the US labour market and record-low core inflation, US policy-makers introduced additional stimulus measures. As expected at the time of the October Report, the Federal Reserve announced a second round of quantitative easing in November. In addition, the US government passed legislation in December to provide significant further fiscal stimulus over the next two years.
 
In the euro area, real GDP rose by 1.4В per cent in the third quarter of 2010, and available indicators point to fairly robust growth in the fourth quarter, concentrated in the core countries, especially Germany. Growth in the peripheral economies was restrained, however, by fiscal tightening, increased concerns about sovereign debt and the banking sector, and a lack of competitiveness.
 
In Japan, data released since the October Report show that the recession was deeper and the rebound in 2010 was stronger, leaving the recent level of GDP slightly weaker than previously measured. Economic growth in 2010 benefited from both robust external demand and fiscal stimulus programs designed to promote consumption. Growth is estimated to have weakened significantly in the fourth quarter, however, reflecting the removal of certain fiscal incentives supporting household spending and the recent appreciation of the yen.
 
Real GDP in China grew by slightly less than 10В per cent over the second half of 2010 on a year-over-year basis. Domestic demand remained vigorous, supported by buoyant growth in investment spending and solid increases in consumption, while housing activity continued to rise, despite earlier attempts to cool the sector. In an effort to counteract rising inflationary pressures, the Chinese authorities have tightened monetary policy further, with a combination of interest rate increases and various administrative measures.
 
The Bank of Canada's index of global commodity prices has increased by 14В per cent since the October Report, primarily reflecting solid demand, especially from Asia. In addition, there may have been some impact from financial flows into commodities. Natural gas prices rose by 26В per cent in response to seasonal factors but, owing to ample supply, remained well below their average level of recent years. Oil prices have increased by about 12В per cent, driven by stronger global demand for crude oil and declining inventories, while non-energy commodity prices have risen by close to 11 per cent since the October Report, reflecting solid gains in most components.
 
Conditions in global financial markets remain generally accommodative, despite heightened concerns over fiscal challenges and vulnerable banking sectors in some European countries.
 
Government bond yields in the major advanced economies have increased since the October Report, but nevertheless remain low by historical standards. The rise in yields appears to largely reflect upward revisions to expectations for global economic growth following the release of positive economic data and, in the case of the United States, additional fiscal stimulus.
 
In late October and November, investors became increasingly worried about public finances in the peripheral countries of Europe and, in some cases, the budgetary impact of stresses in the banking sector. Credit spreads for the most affected sovereigns widened sharply, and the turbulence affected several euro-area countries. In response, European policy-makers announced various measures to safeguard financial stability, including a stabilization package for Ireland and more aggressive fiscal consolidation measures in several countries. The European Central Bank also increased the size of its exceptional liquidity support to euro-area banks and purchases of sovereign bonds in the secondary market. Financial market developments since then suggest that additional measures may be required.
 
Notwithstanding these stresses, most global equity and corporate bond markets have continued to perform strongly since the October Report, owing to solid corporate earnings and revenues and generally better-than-expected economic data. Global corporate bond markets continue to see robust issuance and lower spreads, particularly on riskier securities such as high-yield corporate debt, reflecting strong investor demand and increasing risk appetite.
 
In response to better fundamentals and growing investor interest, the currencies of several emerging-market countries have come under continued upward pressure against the US dollar. Although authorities in these countries have reduced the frequency and scale of their foreign exchange interventions since October, several have imposed capital controls and other administrative measures. These policy interventions risk inhibiting the process of real exchange rate adjustment required to correct global imbalances and sustain the recovery.
 
The global economic recovery is projected to continue at a solid pace over 2011-12 as private domestic demand becomes more firmly entrenched. Global growth is expected to be somewhat stronger over the 2011-12 period than was anticipated in the October Report. Although the effects of the debt crisis in peripheral Europe are expected to restrain global economic growth over the projection horizon, these effects are more than offset in 2011 by the impact of stronger momentum in the United States and emerging-market economies.
 
Real GDP in the United States is projected to rise by 3.3 per cent on an average annual basis in 2011 and by 3.2 per cent in 2012. US growth is expected to be stronger in 2011 than anticipated in the October Report, owing to the new fiscal stimulus program, combined with a more rapid recovery in consumer spending.
 
Growth in US household spending is projected to be supported through 2012 by a measured improvement in the pace of job creation. This is against a backdrop of exceptionally weak labour market conditions at present and a long-term unemployment rate that has reached historic highs. As well, in 2011, the new fiscal measures should provide an additional impetus to  . household spending through tax reductions that boost disposable income. However, US state and local governments are expected to limit spending and raise taxes to address large budget gaps, partially counteracting the federal government's fiscal stimulus. Consumption will also continue to be affected by the need to repair household balance sheets and by developments in the housing sector, where a large excess supply of unsold houses is projected to have a persistent restraining effect on prices.
 
US business investment in equipment and software is expected to strengthen further in response to low financing costs, improved bank lending terms and a more positive growth outlook. However, high vacancy rates in the commercial and retail sectors, combined with tighter credit terms for firms in these sectors, should continue to dampen growth in investment in structures.
 
Net exports are expected to make an increasingly positive contribution to growth over the projection horizon, aided by a further depreciation of the US dollar real effective exchange rate and firming external demand for US goods and services.
 
In the euro area, a modest recovery is projected through 2012. Nevertheless, the region faces considerable risks and challenges. Recent indicators suggest that growth in early 2011 will be somewhat firmer than anticipated in the October Report, especially in the core European economies. Economic activity is expected to be somewhat weaker thereafter, reflecting fiscal austerity measures and financial pressures arising from continuing concerns about the sustainability of peripheral-country debt. Growth prospects in heavily indebted peripheral economies are much weaker and more uncertain than those of the core economies. Despite ambitious deficit-cutting plans, the peripheral countries will continue to be vulnerable to shifts in market sentiment because of their substantial debt-refinancing requirements and relatively weak financial systems. Moreover, they will remain heavily dependent on the resilience in the core economies, given the large intra-region concentration of their exports.
 
Economic growth in Japan is projected to slow over 2011-12 in response to the unwinding of fiscal stimulus and the earlier appreciation of the yen. Growth nevertheless remains somewhat above that of potential output, reflecting a gradual broadening of the recovery. An improvement in labour market conditions is expected to provide some support to domestic demand. However, exports are projected to be an important driver of growth through 2012.
 
In China, a gradual rotation of demand toward consumption and away from investment and exports is expected to occur over the projection horizon, facilitated by a modest appreciation of China's real effective exchange rate. Growth in China is projected to be somewhat higher in 2011 than was anticipated in the October Report, driven by stronger momentum in domestic demand. However, growth in 2012 is expected to be slightly weaker than anticipated, owing to the restraining effects of tighter monetary and credit measures.
 
Real GDP growth is projected to slow slightly in other emerging-market economies. A removal of the fiscal stimulus introduced during the recession and a tightening in monetary policy in reaction to growing inflationary pressures are expected to moderate the growth of domestic demand. Moreover, a modest appreciation of real exchange rates in these economies is projected to constrain the growth of their net exports.
 
The Bank's commodity price index is expected to increase over the projection horizon, supported by the global economic recovery. Following recent sharp increases, prices for non-energy commodities are expected to remain relatively steady over the projection horizon as growing demand is largely offset by increases in supply. The latest futures curves suggest that oil prices will average US$95 in 2012, and that natural gas prices will continue to rise as the excess supply is drawn down.
 
The Canadian economy is now in a period of more modest growth, following the strong recovery experienced in late 2009 and early 2010. As in the October Report, the Bank projects a moderate pace of overall expansion, with accommodative financial conditions continuing to provide support as fiscal stimulus unwinds. Demand in Canada is expected to rely relatively less on household and government expenditures and more on business investment and net exports. The projected increase in the contribution to growth from net exports is supported by the improved near-term outlook for US and global economic growth. However, the cumulative effects of Canada's poor relative productivity performance and the persistent strength in the Canadian dollar have eroded Canada's competitiveness and are restraining the recovery in net exports.
 
As projected in the October Report, growth is expected to absorb the considerable slack in the economy by the end of 2012. In this context, total and core inflation are projected to gradually return to 2 per cent over that horizon.
 
Real GDP growth in Canada slowed to 1.0 per cent (at an annual rate) in the third quarter. This was a slightly weaker result than had been expected in the October Report, as strength in domestic demand in the third quarter was largely offset by a further deterioration in net exports.
 
Consumer spending continued to grow robustly in the third quarter, while housing investment remained at a high level, despite the passing of several transitory supports to activity. The strength in consumer spending was in line with the growth of personal disposable income through the second and third quarters, leaving the savings rate near its historical low.
 
Business investment continued to grow vigorously in the third quarter. Despite the strong increase in business investment since the end of 2009, however, less than half of the unusually large decline that occurred during the recession has been recovered.
 
Net exports exerted a more significant than expected drag on growth in the third quarter, as exports declined despite the further recovery in foreign activity and imports continued to be boosted by strong domestic demand. Poor relative productivity and the persistent strength in the Canadian dollar have accounted for continued weakness in net exports. However, the softness in exports in the third quarter was also attributable to such temporary factors as the idling of oil pipelines.
 
The Bank estimates that economic growth picked up to 2.3 per cent in the fourth quarter, reflecting a rebound in net exports and a deceleration in household expenditures and business investment from their recent rapid pace of growth. Following large contributions in previous quarters, inventories likely subtracted from GDP growth in the fourth quarter, consistent with stabilizing the trend in the stock-to-sales ratio.
 
Various indicators of capacity suggest that considerable slack remains in the Canadian economy.
 
The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap indicates that excess capacity in the economy was relatively stable in the fourth quarter, at about -1.8 per cent. The Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey reported that the proportion of firms that would have difficulty responding to an unexpected increase in demand remains below its historical average, as does the proportion of firms facing labour shortages. The still-elevated unemployment rate and the weakness in average weekly hours worked also point to the persistence of slack in the labour market.
 
On balance, the Bank judges that the economy was operating at about 1 3/4 per cent below its production capacity in the fourth quarter of 2010, a slightly greater degree of slack than the Bank had projected in October.
 
Core inflation has remained below 2 per cent in recent months, consistent with considerable excess supply in the economy, as well as the moderation in the growth of unit labour costs. There is some evidence that HST-related tax refunds to businesses may also have been passed through, dampening core inflation in line with the Bank's expectations. The 1.6 per cent average rate for core inflation in October and November was consistent with the Bank's projection at the time of the October Report.
 
Total CPI inflation has risen in recent quarters, mainly reflecting the impact of the HST and other changes in provincial indirect taxes that took effect in July, as well as higher energy prices. Total CPI inflation in October and November averaged 2.2В per cent, slightly above the Bank's expectations in the October Report.
 
Recent survey measures continue to indicate that inflation expectations are well anchored at the 2 per cent target. As reported in the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey, 91 per cent of firms expect average inflation over the next two years to remain within the 1 to 3 per cent control range. The January Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation was 2.2 per cent in 2011 and 2.1 per cent in 2012. Market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations also continue to be consistent with the 2В per cent inflation-control target.
 
Financial conditions in Canada remain exceptionally stimulative, providing important ongoing support to the economic recovery.
 
Effective borrowing costs for households remain very low by historical standards, consistent with the low level of bank funding costs. Nonetheless, borrowing costs have risen over the past year, including a marginal increase in the period since the October Report that reflects higher yields on Canadian government bonds, in line with global developments. In this context, the growth of household credit has eased modestly relative to the rapid pace seen earlier in 2010.
 
Effective borrowing costs for Canadian businesses have also stayed very low despite some increase in 2010. As well, in recent months, access to financing has continued to improve for Canadian firms, according to both the Bank's Senior Loan Officer Survey and the Business Outlook Survey. The Senior Loan Officer Survey suggests that heightened competition among lenders and more favourable economic conditions have driven an overall easing in lending conditions, which has increasingly spread to smaller businesses. The improved global economic outlook and the still low level of government bond yields have underpinned strong investor demand for corporate bonds and equities, reflected in the persistence of narrow credit spreads despite elevated corporate bond issuance and further recovery in the S&P/TSX Composite Index. Favourable financing conditions, as well as the ongoing recovery in business investment and increased activity in mergers and acquisitions, have contributed to the observed pickup in the overall growth of business credit.
 
Growth in the narrow monetary aggregates has continued to slow in recent months from the unusually rapid pace set earlier in 2010, consistent with reduced liquidity preference among households and firms. Growth in the broader M2++ aggregate remains below its historical average, suggesting subdued inflation pressures ahead.
 
The Canadian dollar has averaged 100 cents US since the December fixed announcement date, compared with the 98 cents assumed in the October Report. It appreciated relative to other currencies, with the Canadian-dollar effective exchange rate index rising by about 4 per cent since the October Report.
 
The Bank's base-case projection incorporates the following key assumptions: a Canada/US exchange rate averaging 100 cents US; energy prices in line with recent futures prices; relatively steady prices for non-energy commodities; and supportive global credit conditions.
 
The Bank continues to expect moderate economic growth through 2011 and 2012. As the expansion progresses, demand in Canada is projected to rely increasingly on business investment and net exports, and less on government and household expenditures. On an average annual basis, real GDP is projected to grow by 2.4 per cent in 2011 and 2.8 per cent in 2012, a slightly stronger growth profile than had been anticipated at the time of the October Report. More robust growth in business investment, as well as heightened near-term momentum in household expenditures and US and global demand, account for the modestly improved outlook. Nonetheless, weaker growth in the second half of 2010 implies somewhat greater excess capacity in the near term. Thus, the Bank continues to expect the economy to return to full capacity only by the end of 2012.
 
Growth in consumer spending is expected to evolve broadly in line with that of personal disposable income over the projection horizon. The government's recently announced mortgage insurance measures will contribute to a more balanced path for household expenditures.
 
As in the October Report, growth in disposable income is expected to moderate from its recent trend as a result of the withdrawal of fiscal stimulus, announced compensation restraints by governments and a slow recovery in average hours worked. With Canadian household balance sheets becoming increasingly stretched and consumption unlikely to be bolstered by gains in house prices, growth in household spending is expected to moderate in line with income growth. This means that the savings rate is projected to remain near historic lows and household debt near historic highs. These factors, taken together with reduced affordability, point to a weakening in residential investment over the projection horizon. The Bank expects the share of the economy accounted for by residential investment, and by household expenditures more broadly, to decline gradually but remain well above historical averages.
 
The Bank's base-case scenario, which takes into account the federal government's recent announcement that stimulus measures will be extended through October, continues to assume that the contribution of government spending to real GDP growth will turn negative over the projection horizon.
 
The rapid increase in business investment is expected to continue over the projection horizon as the unusually sharp decline experienced during the recession is unwound. This reflects the solid financial positions of Canadian firms, favourable credit conditions, higher commodity prices, the stronger Canadian dollar, and the impetus to improve productivity amid heightened pressures to become more competitive as the global economy recovers. The Bank's Business Outlook Survey has also indicated a consistently high level of investment intentions in recent quarters. Reflecting all of these factors, the Bank expects a somewhat more robust recovery in capital spending than previously projected.
 
Consistent with the October Report, the Bank expects an improvement in net exports over the projection horizon as external demand recovers and growth in Canadian domestic demand moderates from its previous rapid pace. While near-term growth prospects in the United States and other foreign economies have significantly improved of late, competitiveness challenges are expected to leave the projected profile of Canadian export growth only slightly stronger than previously anticipated. The rebalancing of domestic demand toward business investment and pressures on Canadian competitiveness also imply higher imports relative to the profile of overall domestic demand. The strength of net exports will continue to be sensitive to currency movements and the expected recovery in productivity growth, in addition to prospects for external demand.
 
The outlook for core inflation is broadly unchanged from the October Report. Core inflation is projected to gradually edge up to 2 per cent by the end of 2012, as excess supply in the economy is slowly absorbed. Inflation expectations remain well anchored. As well, ongoing modest growth in labour compensation, combined with an anticipated pickup in productivity, is expected to restrain growth in unit labour costs and, in turn, dampen inflation pressures.
 
The near-term profile for core inflation is slightly more subdued than previously anticipated, consistent with slightly greater excess supply in the near term. In the first quarter, the 12-month rate of core inflation will also be dampened by the unusual price increases for motor vehicles and hotel accommodation that occurred in early 2010.
 
Total CPI inflation is projected to remain slightly higher than the 2 per cent target over the first half of 2011, as the HST and other changes in provincial indirect taxes continue to boost the 12-month rate of change in consumer prices. As with previous changes in indirect taxes, for the purposes of monetary policy, the Bank is looking through the first-round effect on prices of these changes. Excluding the impact of changes in indirect taxes, total CPI inflation is expected to gradually converge to the 2 per cent target, broadly in line with the projected profile for core inflation.
 
This projection includes a gradual reduction in monetary stimulus over the projection horizon, consistent with achieving the inflation target.
 
The uncertainty surrounding the Bank's inflation projection is illustrated using fan charts. Chart 29 and Chart 30 depict the 50В per cent and 90В per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the first quarter of 2011 to the end of 2012.
 
Despite improvements in the outlook for the global and Canadian economies, risks remain elevated.
 
There are two main upside risks to inflation, relating to higher commodity prices and the possibility of greater-than-projected momentum in the Canadian household sector:
 
The global economy could be stronger than currently anticipated, particularly if measures to moderate demand in emerging-market economies prove insufficient. This could boost commodity prices, which would increase incomes in Canada and support stronger investment activity and household spending.
 
There could be stronger-than-expected momentum in household expenditures in Canada. With exceptionally stimulative financing conditions, borrowing could continue to grow faster than income.
 
There are two main downside risks to inflation, relating to Canadian competitiveness and the possibility of weaker-than-projected household expenditures.
 
The Bank expects net exports to provide greater support to the Canadian economic expansion over the projection horizon. However, with ongoing productivity challenges and the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar, the anticipated recovery in net exports may not fully materialize. Moreover, renewed tensions in foreign exchange markets could inhibit the necessary global adjustment and put additional pressure on freely floating currencies.
 
With household expenditures in Canada significantly above their historical average as a share of GDP, growth in household spending might decelerate more rapidly than is currently anticipated. Relatedly, if there were a sudden weakening in the Canadian housing sector, it could have sizable spillover effects on other areas of the economy, such as consumption, given the high debt loads of some Canadians.
 
In addition, challenges in Europe continue to be a significant source of uncertainty for the global outlook. A comprehensive solution to the sovereign debt and financial stability issues in a number of countries will be required.
 
Overall, the Bank judges that the risks to the inflation outlook are roughly balanced over the projection horizon.