The global economy has slowed markedly as several downside risks to the projection outlined in July have been realized. Financial market volatility has increased and there has been a generalized retrenchment from risk-taking across global markets. The combination of ongoing deleveraging by banks and households, increased fiscal austerity, and declining business and consumer confidence is expected to restrain growth across the advanced economies. The Bank now expects that the euro area - where these dynamics are most acute - will experience a brief recession. The Bank's base-case scenario assumes that the euro-area crisis will be contained, although this assumption is clearly subject to downside risks. In the United States, diminished household confidence, tighter financial conditions and increased fiscal drag are expected to result in weak real GDP growth through the first half of 2012, before growth strengthens gradually thereafter. In Japan, reconstruction activity is projected to boost growth over 2012-13, although Japan's economy will be constrained by reduced global activity and the sharp appreciation of the yen. Growth in China and other emerging-market economies is projected to moderate to a more sustainable pace in response to weaker external demand and the lagged effects of past policy tightening. These developments, combined with recent declines in commodity prices, are expected to dampen global inflationary pressures.
 
The outlook for the Canadian economy has weakened since July, with the significantly less-favourable external environment affecting Canada through financial, confidence and trade channels. Although Canadian growth rebounded in the third quarter with the unwinding of temporary factors, underlying economic momentum has slowed and is expected to remain modest through the middle of next year. Domestic demand is expected to remain the principal driver of growth over the projection horizon, though at a more subdued pace than previously anticipated. Household expenditures are now projected to grow relatively modestly as lower commodity prices and heightened volatility in financial markets weigh on the incomes, wealth and confidence of Canadian households. Business fixed investment is still expected to grow solidly in response to very stimulative financial conditions and heightened competitive pressures, although it will be dampened by the weaker and more uncertain global economic environment. Net exports are expected to remain a source of weakness, owing to sluggish foreign demand and ongoing competitiveness challenges, including the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar.
 
Overall, the Bank expects that growth in Canada will be slow through mid-2012 before picking up as the global economic environment improves, uncertainty dissipates and confidence increases. The Bank projects that the economy will expand by 2.1 per cent in 2011, 1.9 per cent in 2012 and 2.9 per cent in 2013.
 
The weaker economic outlook implies greater and more persistent economic slack than previously anticipated, with the Canadian economy now expected to return to full capacity by the end of 2013. As a result, core inflation is expected to be slightly softer than previously expected, declining through 2012 before returning to 2 per cent by the end of 2013. The projection for total CPI inflation has also been revised down, reflecting the recent reversal of earlier sharp increases in world energy prices as well as modestly weaker core inflation. Total CPI inflation is expected to trough around 1 per cent by the middle of 2012 before rising with core inflation to the 2 per cent target by the end of 2013, as excess supply in the economy is slowly absorbed.
 
Several significant upside and downside risks are present in the inflation outlook for Canada.
 
The three main upside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the possibility of stronger-than-expected inflationary pressures in the global economy, stronger momentum in Canadian household spending, and the possibility of a faster-than-expected rebound in business and consumer confidence, due to more decisive policy action in the major advanced economies.
 
The three main downside risks to inflation in Canada relate to sovereign debt and banking concerns in Europe, the increased probability of a recession in the US economy, and the possibility that growth in household spending could be weaker than projected.
 
Overall, the Bank judges that these risks are roughly balanced over the projection horizon.
 
Reflecting all of these factors, on 25 October, the Bank maintained the target for the overnight rate at 1 per cent. With the target interest rate near historic lows and the financial system functioning well, there is considerable monetary policy stimulus in Canada. The Bank will continue to monitor carefully economic and financial developments in the Canadian and global economies, together with the evolution of risks, and set monetary policy consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target over the medium term.
 
The global economy has slowed markedly as several of the downside risks to the projection outlined in the July Monetary Policy Report have been realized. Acute fiscal and financial strains in Europe and concerns about the strength of global economic activity have led to increased financial market volatility, reduced business and consumer confidence, and a generalized retrenchment from risk-taking. In this context, pressures in the European banking sector have escalated, contributing to a sharp slowdown in economic growth in the euro area. In the United States, revisions to national accounts data indicate that the recent recession was deeper than previously reported, and the recovery shallower. Growth in many emerging-market economies has also moderated, although it remains relatively robust. Commodity prices have declined significantly in response to diminished prospects for global economic growth.
 
Consistent with historical experience following severe financial crises, the recovery in advanced economies is projected to continue at a much slower pace than is typical in post-recession periods. In the euro area, economic growth is expected to remain weak over the projection horizon. Even though the Bank's projection assumes that steps are taken to contain the crisis, growth is expected to be restrained by ongoing bank and sovereign deleveraging and only a gradual recovery in confidence. Repair of household balance sheets and an anticipated tightening in fiscal policy are also expected to weigh on real GDP growth in the United States. Growth in emerging-market economies is projected to decelerate in response to lower demand from advanced economies. Owing to the lack of exchange rate adjustment and limited progress in rebalancing global demand, the weak and uneven nature of the current recovery is expected to persist.
 
Global economic growth has weakened considerably in recent months, reflecting a sharp slowing in activity in the United States and the euro area. The pace of growth in emerging-market economies has also decelerated, albeit from relatively high levels.
 
Real GDP growth in the euro area fell to 0.6 per cent in the second quarter, well below expectations at the time of the July Report, and recent indicators point to continued weakness in the third quarter. Growth in the core economies has slowed significantly, while economic activity in the periphery remains subdued. Consumer and business confidence, which were already low in the periphery, have also dropped markedly in the core economies. Euro-area banks are restricting access to credit as they attempt to delever. Slowing economic activity, reduced confidence and heightened financial stress are becoming mutually reinforcing as concerns regarding the fiscal sustainability of peripheral Europe spread to some of the core economies, increasing worries about the stability of the banking system.
 
In the United States, information released since the July Report points to a much lower path for US real GDP in recent years than earlier estimates had suggested. While the fundamental forces and dynamics affecting the US economy have not changed, their magnitudes now appear much larger. The July revisions to the national accounts data indicate that the US recession was deeper and the recovery shallower than previously reported. Real GDP growth has slowed from an annual rate of roughly 2.5 per cent in the second half of 2010 to less than 1.0 per cent in the first half of 2011. Growth is estimated to have improved in the third quarter of 2011, supported by the recent decline in commodity prices and the restoration of supply chains following the natural disasters in Japan. However, efforts to repair household balance sheets in the United States are exerting a much stronger restraining effect on domestic demand than previously anticipated.
 
Recent adverse shocks to US household finances and falling consumer confidence have led to a marked slowing in US consumption spending and have rendered the process of balance-sheet repair even more challenging. Employment gains have remained sluggish since the start of the year, with net job creation in the private sector slowing and governments continuing to cut their payrolls. In addition, household wealth has been hit by recent declines in equity prices. Housing demand has remained weak and, together with the elevated stock of vacant homes, has depressed residential construction. A negative cycle is under way in which persistently high rates of mortgage delinquency are creating stress for financial institutions, leading to greater caution in the extension of credit and exacerbating the weakness in housing demand. This will gradually dissipate as households repair their balance sheets.
 
US economic activity has been supported through this difficult period by strength in business investment and exports. Business investment in equipment and software has been underpinned by the low cost of capital and healthy corporate balance sheets. However, investment in non-residential structures has remained subdued in view of continuing excess capacity. US exports have benefited from solid demand in emerging-market economies and from enhanced competitiveness stemming from robust productivity growth and the past depreciation of the US dollar.
 
Real GDP in Japan contracted by 2.1 per cent in the second quarter, but incoming data point to positive growth in the third quarter, driven by the restoration of supply chains and the reconstruction of infrastructure following the natural disasters in March. Household spending has also recovered, supported by a pickup in consumer confidence. However, growth in exports, which had been an important contributing factor to GDP growth in earlier periods, has stalled in the past few months. Owing to concerns that a rising yen would weaken export growth even further, Japanese authorities intervened in foreign exchange markets at the beginning of August to limit the appreciation of the currency.
 
In China, growth in real GDP moderated to 9.1 per cent in the third quarter, largely in response to the past tightening in monetary policy. The growth of consumption has slowed somewhat, but real estate investment remains robust, boosted by a government program to build 10 million social housing units in each of 2011 and 2012. Reflecting the ongoing weakness in activity in advanced economies, China's export growth has decelerated recently. Moderating food prices have contributed to a slight decline in inflation, but price pressures remain elevated, with consumer prices rising by 6.1 percent on a year-over-year basis in September - well in excess of the government's target of 4 per cent.
 
Commodity prices have declined significantly since the July Report in response to the deteriorating outlook for global economic growth, although they remain high by historical standards. Energy prices have registered the sharpest drop, while prices for non-energy commodities have decreased more modestly, owing to tight near-term supply conditions for agricultural commodities.
 
Although underlying inflation pressures in many emerging-market economies remain a source of concern, authorities are reluctant to tighten monetary conditions further, given the declining prospects for global growth. In the major advanced economies, in contrast, underlying inflation pressures remain contained, reflecting continuing excess supply conditions. Policy interest rates in these economies have stayed at or close to historically low levels, and a number of central banks have undertaken additional policy actions to ease monetary conditions or reduce financial stress. The US Federal Reserve has continued on its path of quantitative easing, modifying its balance-sheet operations in an effort to put downward pressure on US long-term and mortgage interest rates. The European Central Bank has announced a series of measures, including two long-term refinancing operations and the reactivation of its covered-bond purchase program. The Bank of Japan and the Bank of England have expanded their asset-purchase programs.
 
Conditions in global financial markets have deteriorated since the last Report and risk aversion has escalated. Markets have experienced significant volatility, triggered by a reassessment of the prospects for global economic growth, as well as heightened worries over debt sustainability in the euro area and uncertainty over the direction of fiscal policy in the United States. The already negative tone in financial markets has been exacerbated by numerous credit-rating downgrades of sovereigns and global financial institutions. These developments have reinforced concerns about the fiscal situations in many major economies and the political challenges that must be overcome.
 
As a result, investment flows have shifted toward safer and more-liquid assets. Government bond yields in a number of advanced economies, where markets are most liquid and which are perceived to be better credit risks, have fallen sharply, with 10-year yields trading at or near all-time record lows. In addition, safe-haven currencies have appreciated.
 
The prices of riskier assets, in contrast, have declined significantly. Global equity indexes have decreased by about 5 to 20 per cent since the last Report, with an even larger decline reported in financial sub-indexes. Many euro-area sovereigns are facing rising funding costs, and European banks have experienced severe funding pressures and increased costs to insure against default risk, owing to concerns about their exposures to the sovereign debt of euro-area peripheral countries.
 
Conditions in corporate credit markets have also deteriorated. Corporate spreads have widened, and corporate issuance has fallen to a fraction of the levels seen earlier in the year. Liquidity in secondary credit markets has been extremely limited, and short-term trading has often been driven by headlines regarding the European situation.
 
Global economic growth is projected to slow to slightly above 3 per cent in 2012, well below expectations at the time of the July Report. Ongoing deleveraging by households, banks and governments, declining confidence, and the sovereign debt crisis in Europe are expected to restrain growth in the advanced economies. Growth in emerging-market economies is projected to slow in response to weakening external demand and the lagged effects of past policy tightening. In 2013, global economic growth is expected to pick up as confidence improves and corrective policy measures expected to be taken in Europe and elsewhere begin to have an effect.
 
The Bank's base-case scenario assumes that the crisis in the euro area will be contained and that additional actions will be undertaken to ensure debt sustainability, strengthen banks' capital buffers, and create a larger and more effective fund to stabilize the funding costs of affected sovereigns at sustainable levels. This assumption is clearly subject to downside risks.
 
Financial strains, bank deleveraging, fiscal austerity measures and declining confidence lead nonetheless to a mild recession in the euro area beginning at the end of 2011. The weakened state of banks' balance sheets is projected to constrain both consumption and investment growth, with the effects on investment being particularly significant, owing to heavy corporate reliance on bank funding. A modest recovery is expected to start in mid-2012, when credit conditions begin to improve. Real GDP growth is projected to gather some momentum in 2013 as the benefits from the reforms put in place to address the debt crisis begin to materialize and confidence gradually improves.
 
Real GDP growth in the United States is projected to remain weak through the first half of 2012, averaging about 1 1/4 per cent, or around levels at which the probability of recession increases. However, US economic growth is expected to strengthen gradually, starting in the second half of 2012, in response to an easing in monetary conditions and an improvement in the situation in Europe. Consistent with the historical experience following severe financial crises elsewhere, growth is projected to remain quite modest. GDP growth in 2013 rebounds to 3.3 per cent, but the level of real GDP by the end of the projection horizon is still well below that anticipated in the July Report.
 
Fiscal consolidation in the United States is expected to exert an important drag on growth of about 1 percentage point in 2012 and 2 percentage points in 2013. This is slightly larger than anticipated in the July Report, reflecting new measures to restrain government spending adopted as part of the agreement to raise the US debt ceiling. The Bank's projection does not include any of the new fiscal stimulus measures proposed by the US administration in the American Jobs Act. If fully implemented, these measures could add as much as 1.3 percentage points to growth in 2012 through tax reductions and increases in expenditures and transfers, but would subtract close to 1 percentage point from growth in 2013, when many of the proposed measures begin to expire.
 
Growth in US consumption is expected to be held back by ongoing elevated savings rates and a subdued recovery in labour market conditions, as well as the drag from fiscal consolidation, which will lower household disposable income. An easing in financial conditions in response to the US Federal Reserve's balance-sheet operations is projected to provide some offsetting support. The level of residential construction is expected to remain weak over 2012-13, with a gradual recovery beginning only around the middle of 2012. Growth in the construction of non-residential structures is projected to continue at a modest pace through 2013, supported by a gradual easing in lending conditions.
 
Exports and business investment in equipment and software should continue to provide important support for US economic growth over the coming years. After some slowing during the first half of 2012, business investment is expected to grow robustly over the remainder of the projection horizon, boosted by the low cost of capital and gradually improving economic conditions. In 2012, export growth is constrained by weakening global demand, but is projected to strengthen in 2013 in tandem with the recovery in the global economy.
 
Reconstruction activities are expected to boost economic growth in Japan over 2012-13. Growth is projected to be significantly weaker than was anticipated in the July Report, however, owing to reduced prospects for global economic growth and the recent sharp appreciation of the yen.
 
Real GDP growth in China and other emerging-market economies is expected to moderate to a more sustainable pace over the projection horizon in response to slowing growth in advanced economies. At the same time, a gradual rotation away from exports and toward stronger consumption is projected, facilitated by structural policies and a modest appreciation of the real effective exchange rates in China and other emerging-market economies. These developments, combined with lower commodity prices, are expected to dampen inflation pressures.
 
Commodity prices are projected to remain roughly 10 per cent below the levels anticipated at the time of the July Report. Steady demand from emerging-market economies and limited increases in supply should nevertheless keep prices at levels that are relatively high by historical standards. Prices for non-energy commodities should stay close to current levels through 2013, with a rebound in metals prices offsetting a projected easing in the prices of agricultural products. Based on the latest futures curve, prices for West Texas Intermediate crude oil are expected to move within a range of US$85 to US$89 per barrel until the end of 2013, down from a range of US$100 to US$103 at the time of the July Report. According to the latest futures curve, natural gas prices are projected to increase by about 1 per cent in 2012 and 13 per cent in 2013 as environmental standards encourage greater use of natural gas in the United States.
 
The economic outlook in Canada has weakened, reflecting the substantially downgraded outlook for the global economy. The weaker and more uncertain global economic and financial environment will affect the Canadian economy through financial, confidence and trade channels. As a result, compared with expectations in the July Report, the Bank now anticipates a more subdued profile for both final domestic demand and exports over the projection horizon. Overall, the Bank now projects slow growth in real GDP in Canada through mid-2012. Economic growth is expected to improve thereafter, in line with an improved global environment as uncertainty dissipates and confidence recovers. This base-case scenario assumes that the crisis in the euro area will be contained, although this assumption is clearly subject to downside risks.
 
The weaker economic outlook implies greater and more persistent economic slack than anticipated in the July Report. As a result, core inflation is projected to be slightly softer than previously expected, declining through 2012 before returning to 2 per cent by the end of 2013. The projection for total CPI inflation has also been revised down, reflecting a lower profile for world energy prices, as well as modestly weaker core inflation. Accordingly, total CPI inflation is expected to decline from its recent peak of over 3 per cent to around 1 per cent by mid-2012, before rising with core inflation to the 2 per cent target as excess supply in the economy is slowly absorbed.
 
Economic growth in Canada stalled in the second quarter, owing largely to temporary factors. While the unwinding of these factors has led to a rebound in economic activity in the third quarter, the underlying momentum in the economy has slowed.
 
Real GDP declined at an annual rate of 0.4 per cent in the second quarter, a weaker outcome than had been expected in the July Report, owing to a substantial deterioration in net exports. Exports declined markedly in the second quarter, reflecting softer foreign demand and ongoing challenges to Canadian competitiveness, as well as important temporary factors. These factors included the anticipated adverse impact of supply-chain disruptions resulting from the disasters in Japan earlier in the year, as well as other unanticipated disruptions that constrained activities in the energy sector. Imports continued to grow robustly in the second quarter, reflecting large increases in Canadian business investment in machinery and equipment and in inventories.
 
Growth in final domestic demand remained solid in the second quarter, with all its major components contributing to the increase. Consumer spending picked up after a very weak first quarter. The pace of growth in consumption remained subdued compared with that registered during the recovery, however, reflecting the adjustment to higher food and energy prices, as well as slower growth in personal disposable income. Growth in residential investment fell off sharply in the second quarter following a large increase in the first quarter, when some activity was pulled forward in advance of changes to the regulations for mortgage insurance. Business fixed investment continued to recover strongly in the second quarter, including a temporary boost from the purchase of a large natural gas platform. Government expenditures, incorporating spending from all levels of government, also continued to contribute to real GDP growth.
 
The Bank estimates that economic growth rebounded to 2.0 per cent in the third quarter as the temporary factors that held back net exports in the second quarter unwound. Growth is expected to slip back in the fourth quarter, however, more accurately reflecting the underlying growth in the economy in an environment of lower confidence and heightened uncertainty.
 
The Bank's projection for the growth of potential output in Canada over the 2011-13 period is little changed from the projection in the October 2010 Report. Potential output growth is expected to increase from 1.6 per cent in 2011 to 2.1 per cent in 2013. The projection horizon has also been extended to 2014, when the growth of potential output is expected to be 2.2 per cent. As a result of the strong and sustained recovery in investment spending, as well as efficiency gains, trend productivity is projected to improve as Canadian firms strive to adopt best practices in the face of competitive pressures. At the same time, demographic forces will continue to reduce the trend rate of growth of labour input.
 
Various indicators suggest greater economic slack in recent months. The level of real GDP has been markedly lower in the second and third quarters than the Bank had projected, suggesting that the output gap in the third quarter was considerably wider than anticipated in July. The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap continues to suggest a more modest degree of slack, but has also widened noticeably from -0.5 per cent in the first quarter to -1.0 per cent in the third quarter. Key labour market indicators, such as the unemployment rate and the proportion of involuntary part-time workers, as well as the below-average proportion of firms reporting labour shortages in the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey , point to material excess capacity. In addition, the Bank's autumn survey found that the proportion of firms indicating that they would have difficulty responding to an unexpected increase in demand had diminished noticeably in comparison with the previous survey, although it remained near its historical average.
 
On balance, the Bank judges that the economy was operating at about 1 1/4 per cent below its production capacity in the third quarter of 2011, a substantially larger degree of slack than the Bank had anticipated in July.
 
As anticipated in the July Report, core CPI inflation rose to 1.9 per cent in the third quarter from 1.6 per cent in the second quarter. Part of this increase reflects the dissipation of the HST effect on year-over-year core inflation.  Core food price inflation was somewhat lower than had been anticipated in the July Report, but the impact on core inflation was offset by slightly larger than expected increases in the prices of some core services and clothing. Underlying inflation pressures remain contained, reflecting the persistence of excess supply in the economy and modest growth in labour compensation, along with the dampening effect from the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
 
Total CPI inflation fell to 3.0 per cent in the third quarter from 3.4 per cent in the second quarter, as the impact of the introduction of the HST in July 2010 on the year-over-year rate of inflation unwound. The drop in total CPI inflation was somewhat smaller than the Bank had projected in the July Report, owing largely to the firmness in gasoline prices despite recent declines in world energy prices, which in turn partly reflects an unusual divergence in the prices of different types of crude oil.
 
Recent survey measures indicate that inflation expectations remain well anchored at the 2 per cent target. The October Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation was 1.9 per cent in 2012. As reported in the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey, 88 per cent of firms expect average inflation over the next two years to remain within the 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range. Market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations also remain consistent with the 2 per cent inflation-control target.
 
The aggregate supply and price of credit to businesses and households in Canada remain very stimulative, providing important ongoing support to the economic expansion. Canadian banks remain well positioned to lend, owing to their strong financial positions and relatively low funding costs. Results from the Business Outlook Survey suggest that the terms and conditions for firms obtaining financing from financial institutions have eased further in recent months, particularly for small and medium-sized businesses. This was consistent with the Bank's Senior Loan Officer Survey for the third quarter of 2011 , which also indicated a further easing in lending conditions, mainly reflecting competition among lenders.
 
Overall financial conditions in Canada have tightened slightly since the July Report, however, as conditions in capital markets have deteriorated. Increased risk aversion, heightened volatility and weaker growth expectations across global markets have weighed on capital market conditions in recent months. While Canadian government bond yields have declined substantially, corporate spreads have widened and market access has tightened for less-creditworthy borrowers. In addition, the S&P/TSX Composite Index has fallen by more than 15 per cent from its peak in April 2011. As a result, the volume of bond and equity issuance has diminished noticeably compared with earlier in the year.
 
Reflecting the ongoing recovery in business investment, growth in total business credit has remained solid in recent months.
 
As anticipated, the growth of household credit has slowed to a rate below its historical average in recent months with the passing of the temporary factors that boosted the demand for residential mortgage credit in the first quarter. These factors include the lagged effects of the surge in sales of existing homes in the fourth quarter of last year, as well as some pulling forward of activity related to changes to mortgage insurance regulations.
 
Growth in the narrow monetary aggregates has rebounded in recent months, implying some reintensification of liquidity preference as uncertainty has risen. Growth in the broader M2++ aggregate has, however, remained moderate in recent months, continuing to suggest subdued inflation pressures ahead.
 
The Canadian dollar has averaged around 99 cents US since the September fixed announcement date, which is below the level of 103 cents US assumed in the July Report. The Canadian-dollar effective exchange rate index has depreciated by an amount similar to the exchange rate with the United States.
 
The Bank's base-case projection incorporates the following key assumptions: a Canada/US exchange rate averaging 99 cents US; energy prices in line with recent futures prices; prices for non-energy commodities remaining at elevated levels; and heightened uncertainty and relatively volatile global financial conditions persisting through mid-2012, before improving gradually.
 
The Bank now sees the Canadian economy growing slowly through mid-2012, after which growth is projected to improve. This projection assumes that the crisis in Europe will be contained, leading to reduced uncertainty and a gradual return of confidence. On an average annual basis, real GDP is projected to grow by 2.1 per cent in 2011 and 1.9 per cent in 2012, while growth in 2013 is expected to pick up temporarily above the rate of potential (to 2.9 per cent). This growth profile implies that the economy is now projected to return to full capacity by the end of 2013.
 
This base-case projection for the Canadian economy is weaker than in the July Report, with the significantly less-favourable external environment affecting Canada through financial, confidence and trade channels. Domestic demand is expected to remain the principal driver of growth over the projection horizon, although at a more subdued pace than previously anticipated. Household expenditures are now projected to grow relatively modestly, as lower commodity prices and heightened volatility in financial markets weigh on the incomes, wealth and confidence of Canadian households. Business fixed investment is still expected to grow solidly in response to very stimulative financial conditions and heightened competitive pressures, although it will be dampened by the weaker and more uncertain global economic environment. The projected profile for Canadian exports has also been revised down, reflecting the lower level of foreign economic activity. Net exports are expected to remain a source of weakness, owing to sluggish foreign demand and ongoing competitiveness challenges, including the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar.
 
The Bank expects relatively modest growth in household expenditures over the projection horizon, compared with both the rapid pace seen during the recovery and the outlook presented in the July Report. Lower commodity prices and heightened volatility in financial markets stemming from the weaker and more uncertain global economic outlook are projected to weigh on the wealth and confidence of Canadian households, resulting in a higher savings rate amid more moderate growth in personal disposable income than was projected in July. As a result, the Bank continues to expect a moderation in the upward trajectory of the household debt-to-income ratio. In this context, the Bank also continues to expect household expenditures as a share of the economy to decline gradually toward its historical average.
 
As in July, business fixed investment is expected to continue to grow solidly over the projection horizon, with considerable scope remaining to make up for the unusually sharp decline experienced during the recession. The outlook for investment continues to be underpinned by the solid financial positions of Canadian firms, favourable credit conditions and relatively high commodity prices, as well as the impetus to improve productivity in response to heightened pressures to become more competitive. However, a somewhat more subdued profile than had been anticipated for the growth of business fixed investment is expected over the near term, reflecting the effects on confidence from the uncertain economic outlook, as well as lower but still elevated commodity prices. This projection for business investment is consistent with the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey, which showed that investment intentions remain strong, albeit slightly less so than in previous surveys, as some firms indicated a more cautious approach to their capital spending plans and a possible postponement of projects, given the uncertainty in the current environment.
 
The Bank's base-case projection assumes that the contribution of government spending to real GDP growth will be negative through the balance of 2011 and into 2012, consistent with the previously announced unwinding of fiscal stimulus. The profile for government expenditures has been adjusted upward from the July Report, incorporating the latest national accounts estimates and information from all levels of government.
 
Canadian exports are now projected to be weaker than anticipated in the July Report, owing to the significantly weaker outlook for foreign demand. Nonetheless, the Bank continues to expect modest growth in exports over the projection horizon, owing to the upward trajectory of US activity, the composition of which is still projected to shift in a relatively favourable manner for Canadian exporters. Imports are expected to grow modestly over the projection horizon, largely reflecting the adverse consequences of the unsettled global economic and financial environment for domestic demand in Canada. Overall, net exports are expected to remain a source of weakness.
 
The Bank expects core inflation to remain close to 2 per cent in the near term, as anticipated in the July Report, before declining through 2012 as considerable economic slack persists and food price inflation slows. Core inflation is then expected to return to 2 per cent by the end of 2013 as excess supply in the economy is slowly absorbed, the growth of labour compensation increases modestly and inflation expectations remain well anchored. This profile for core inflation is slightly softer than was anticipated in the July Report, reflecting the weaker outlook for the Canadian economy.
 
Total CPI inflation is projected to continue to fall in coming quarters, reflecting the gradual impact on gasoline prices of lower oil prices. Total CPI inflation is projected to drop to around 1 per cent by the middle of 2012 before rising with core inflation to the 2 per cent target by the end of 2013. This return to target is somewhat later than had been anticipated in the July Report, owing to the downward revision to core inflation and to the lower profile assumed for world commodity prices.
 
This projection includes a gradual reduction in monetary stimulus over the projection horizon, consistent with achieving the inflation target.
 
The uncertainty surrounding the Bank's inflation projection is illustrated using fan charts. Chart 32 and Chart 33 depict the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the fourth quarter of 2011 to the end of 2013.
 
The inflation outlook in Canada is subject to several significant risks. In particular, the Bank's projection assumes that authorities in Europe are able to contain the ongoing crisis, although this assumption is clearly subject to downside risks.
 
The three main upside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the possibility of stronger-than-expected inflationary pressures in the global economy, stronger momentum in Canadian household spending, and the possibility of a faster-than-expected rebound in business and consumer confidence.
 
Global inflationary pressures could be more persistent than currently projected if growth in emerging-market economies does not decelerate to more sustainable levels or if potential output in advanced economies is lower than projected.
 
There could be stronger-than-expected momentum in household expenditures in Canada. With very stimulative financing conditions, borrowing could grow at a faster pace than anticipated.
 
Uncertainty about the resolve of policy-makers to address challenges and mounting concern about future economic prospects are having a marked effect on global economic activity. More decisive policy action in the major advanced economies than currently anticipated could lift confidence more rapidly than currently projected.
 
The three main downside risks to inflation in Canada relate to sovereign debt and banking concerns in Europe, the increased probability of a recession in the US economy, and the possibility that growth in household spending could be weaker than projected.
 
Failure to contain the crisis in Europe is the most serious risk facing the global and Canadian economies. The effects on Canada through financial, confidence and trade channels would be substantial, given the size and importance of the euro area.
 
Economic growth in the United States through the first half of 2011 slowed to levels that in previous periods often preceded a recession. A US recession would have material consequences for growth and inflation in Canada, given the tight trade and financial links between the two countries.
 
High household debt levels in Canada could lead to a sharper-than-expected deceleration in household spending. Relatedly, if there were a sudden weakening in the Canadian housing sector, it could have sizable spillover effects on other areas of the economy.
 
Overall, the Bank judges that the risks to the inflation outlook in Canada are roughly balanced over the projection horizon.