At the time of last November's Monetary Policy Report, two issues dominated the analysis: the global economic slowdown and the fallout from the September terrorist attacks. The Bank's January 2002 Update described geopolitical developments as having evolved positively and consumer confidence as having improved. The most likely outlook projected for the Canadian economy in the Update was modest growth in the first half of the year, followed by a significant pickup in the pace of activity as the year progressed. The downside risk of sluggish growth persisting throughout 2002 was countered on the upside by the possibility of robust growth early in the year if confidence levels were restored quickly.
 
Recent information indicates that the recovery in the Canadian economy began sooner and has been considerably stronger than anticipated in January. With confidence returning quickly, stimulus from both monetary and fiscal policy has led to strong growth in consumption expenditures and new residential construction. Canadian exports have also been stronger than anticipated, as a result of greater-than-expected growth in the United States. The growth in final sales in the fourth quarter of last year was met largely out of inventories, a situation that is underpinning production in early 2002.
 
With stronger aggregate demand growth in the fourth quarter of last year and in the first quarter of 2002, levels of activity are higher than anticipated, implying that the economy is operating with less excess supply than was previously expected. Core inflation in early 2002 is also somewhat above our earlier projections.
 
While a strong economic recovery appears underway, there are still uncertainties in the outlook, most notably how quickly and strongly business fixed investment will rebound, and how political developments in the Middle East may affect crude oil prices and the global economy.
 
The challenge for monetary policy over the remainder of this year and through 2003 is to help the economy move back to, and then sustain, levels of production at capacity by taking actions aimed at achieving the Bank's 2 per cent target for inflation control. This means reducing, in a timely and measured manner, the substantial amount of monetary stimulus now in place.
 
Since last autumn, core CPI inflation has, on average, been close to the 2 per cent target midpoint of the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range. The rate of increase in the total CPI has fallen sharply to below 2 per cent, reflecting the marked declines in world energy prices over the past year.
 
Core inflation, which had hovered around 2.3 per cent from the spring to the autumn of 2001, decreased to around 1.7 per cent, on average, over the November-January period, before rising back to 2.2 per cent in February. Other measures of the trend rate of inflation were lower than or equal to the core rate.
 
The February level of core inflation, at 2.2 per cent, was somewhat higher than expected. Part of this surprise reflected a change in the timing of certain seasonal price increases (for such items as clothing and footwear and certain travel-related services) and is therefore expected to reverse soon. Another factor was the effect on food prices of the depreciation of the Canadian dollar over the past two years. With the economy still estimated to be in a position of modest excess supply, core inflation is expected to decline in coming months to just below 2 per cent.
 
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI was 1.5 per cent in February, down markedly from 2.6 per cent in September. This drop stemmed mainly from the sizable decline in the prices of oil and natural gas from the high levels of a year ago.
 
The prices of non-energy commodities, after declining markedly in the second half of 2001 because of weaker global demand, have begun to pick up. Buoyant demand contributed to substantial gains in lumber and cattle prices, while production cutbacks and indications of recovering world demand have led to improved prices for base metals.
 
During the last quarter of 2001 and the first quarter of 2002, Canada's economy expanded at a considerably brisker pace than was projected in the November Report. As a result, the Bank's current estimate of the output gap in the first quarter of 2002 is smaller than had been anticipated.
 
Following a contraction in the third quarter, US economic activity picked up in the final quarter of 2001. Towards year-end, US household spending strengthened significantly in response to low interest rates, strong financial incentives on motor vehicle purchases, and a recovery in consumer confidence. At the same time, government spending grew robustly, supported by an acceleration in the pace of military spending. These developments were partly offset by a further decline in business investment and by firms continuing to liquidate inventories rapidly.
 
Canada's real GDP, after falling slightly in the third quarter, grew at a 2 per cent annualized rate in the fourth quarter of 2001 - in marked contrast to the projection of no change at the time of the last Report and in the January 2002 Update. The substantial amount of monetary stimulus that has been provided and recent government measures to improve national security have contributed to a restoration of consumer confidence and a strong increase in household spending on goods and services and on new housing since last September's tragic events. Marked gains in real incomes, partly reflecting earlier tax cuts, as well as special financing incentives for motor vehicle purchases, have also boosted household spending.
 
Moreover, the significant inventory correction in the fourth quarter and the recent resumption of growth in export volumes as a result of renewed economic expansion in the United States point to a recovery that is well underway. Together with strong employment gains in the first quarter of 2002, this suggests that Canadian real GDP growth in the first quarter will be about 4 1/2 per cent, much stronger than anticipated at the time of the January Update.
 
Most indicators confirm that the Canadian economy moved into a position of excess supply during 2001. The marked slowdown in real GDP growth last year was reflected in a rise in the unemployment rate as well as in a substantial drop in the length of the work week. Statistics Canada's measured rate of capacity utilization in the non-farm, goods-producing sector in the fourth quarter of 2001 was well below normal levels. This lack of pressure on capacity, including pressure from labour shortages, was also confirmed by the Bank's most recent survey of firms.
 
The Bank's current estimate of its conventional measures of potential output and the output gap suggests that the amount of economic slack increased in the fourth quarter of 2001 to about 1 per cent of potential output. It is the Bank's judgment, after considering all the indicators, that the economy was in a position of somewhat greater excess supply than the conventional estimate would suggest.
 
In the first quarter of 2002, with economic growth now estimated to be above the economy's potential growth rate, the amount of slack diminished somewhat. This contrasts with earlier projections of a further increase in excess supply in the first half of 2002.
 
The underlying rate of increase in average labour compensation has been in the 3.5 to 4 per cent range recently, based on both the average hourly earnings of permanent workers and labour compensation per person-hour in the business sector. On a year-over-year basis, labour-productivity growth in the business sector increased to 2 per cent in the final quarter of 2001, as hours worked adjusted markedly to the slowdown in economic growth. As a result, the year-over-year increase in unit labour costs in the business sector was 2 per cent at the end of 2001. Year-over-year growth in labour productivity is expected to remain near 2 per cent in the first quarter of 2002.
 
The Bank of Canada reduced the target for the overnight rate by 50 basis points on 27 November 2001 and by 25 basis points on 15 January 2002, bringing the cumulative reduction since January 2001 to 375 basis points. These policy actions came in response to weak current and expected domestic activity and the consequent downward pressures on future inflation.
 
On 5 March, the Bank held the target for the overnight rate at 2.0 per cent, a decision consistent with the release of data indicating that economic conditions in Canada were improving.
 
On 16 April, the Bank raised the target to 2.25 per cent, modestly reducing the amount of monetary stimulus in the economy, in the light of information that a robust recovery appears to be underway.
 
These policy decisions had been broadly anticipated by financial markets.
 
In the United States, the Federal Reserve lowered its target for the federal funds rate by 50 basis points on 6 November 2001 and by 25 basis points on 11 December 2001, bringing the total reduction since January 2001 to 475 basis points. On 30 January 2002 and 19 March, the Federal Reserve decided to leave the target rate unchanged at 1.75 per cent. At its 19 March meeting, the Fed also altered its assessment of the risks to the outlook, stating that they were now balanced with respect to the prospects of price stability and sustainable economic growth.
 
Yield curves in Canada and the United States have shifted upwards compared with last October. With economic activity firming, current levels of futures contracts indicate that financial market participants expect the Federal Reserve and the Bank to raise their respective target rates in coming months. Since the long-term rate reflects the average of expected future short-term rates, the current slope of the yield curve, with the short-term rate well below the long-term rate, also incorporates an expectation of rising short-term rates. Shifts in the slope of the yield curve since 1999 have largely reflected the upward and downward movements in short-term rates, since long-term rates have been much more stable than in the past, largely owing to well-anchored inflation expectations.
 
On a trade-weighted basis, the Canadian dollar is broadly unchanged since last November. Through late December and January, the Canadian dollar depreciated against the US dollar, and it has been relatively stable since then. It has appreciated against other currencies over the period.
 
Since November 2001, the Bank's monetary conditions index has fluctuated in a range between -11.38 and -10.30. The index is currently at a level similar to that of last November.
 
Other financial developments are consistent with signs of economic recovery.
 
Overall, business-credit conditions have become more favourable since last autumn despite some adverse financial developments, including high-profile corporate bankruptcies in North America. In the bond market, this improvement has been reflected in a decline in the spreads between interest rates on corporate bonds and those on government bonds from their peaks in November. Conditions in Canadian markets for commercial paper remain relatively stable, while banks have become somewhat more cautious since last November in their lending practices with riskier borrowers.
 
The Toronto Stock Exchange, which posted a sizable decline after 11 September, is now about 20 per cent higher than the trough recorded last September. These gains reflect less uncertainty and brighter expectations for the economy among investors.
 
Growth of business credit has slowed further since the last Report, with short-term business credit, especially bank loans, down over the period. Bonds and, to a lesser extent, equities have been the main sources of new business financing. Slow growth in business borrowing is consistent with reduced financing needs for inventory and other business investment, as well as with firms paying down their short-term debts. It is also consistent with tighter conditions on bank lending, as would be expected at this point in the business cycle.
 
In contrast, growth in household credit has been robust and higher than growth in personal disposable income. This reflects the strength in household spending, most notably on housing and consumer durables. As a result, continued borrowing has led to a further rise in the ratio of household debt to personal income, although at a slower pace than in the past. Furthermore, this rise has been largely matched by increases in assets, and with the current low level of interest rates, the share of personal income allotted to debt service is well below historical averages.
 
In the United States, economic conditions are improving at a significantly faster pace than was expected in the November Report. Several developments suggest that a recovery is underway. Spending on information technology has stabilized after about a year of decline, and production is recovering, aided by the near completion of the inventory correction. Overall, consumption spending and housing investment have been robust, supported by significant amounts of fiscal and monetary stimulus.
 
US real GDP growth in the first half of this year is thus expected to average about 4 per cent, which is significantly stronger than projected in the November Report. Given the strength in consumption, housing, and inventory investment early in the year, GDP growth in the second half of 2002 is likely to slow to about 3.25 per cent.
 
On an annual average basis in 2002, US economic growth would thus be about 2.5 per cent, compared with the projection of 1 per cent in the November Report. In 2003, economic growth is expected to average about 3.5 per cent.
 
Prospects for economic expansion have also strengthened in other industrialized countries. In Europe, production indicators point to a turnaround in economic activity, supported by the earlier easing in monetary conditions and the strengthening US economy. Growth in the major European economies is expected to be close to 1 1/4 per cent on an average annual basis in 2002, and to rise to about 3 per cent in 2003, as activity gathers momentum. In Japan, ongoing structural difficulties could lead to a further economic contraction in 2002 of about 1 1/2 per cent. However, economic activity in Japan could pick up modestly by about 1 per cent in 2003, aided by the US recovery and easier monetary conditions.
 
Growth prospects for emerging-market economies should improve as global demand picks up. Indeed, a recovery appears to have already started in the Southeast Asian countries. In addition, the impact of the Argentine default on other emerging-market economies has been limited.
 
The projected recovery in world economic growth should contribute to substantial increases in the US-dollar price of non-energy commodities through the next two years. This strengthening demand is expected to underpin the prices of crude oil and natural gas over the remainder of this year. Additional uncertainty about the path of energy prices over the near term has resulted from recent political developments in the Middle East.
 
In Canada, economic growth in the first half of 2002 is expected to average between 3.5 and 4.5 per cent on an annualized basis, markedly higher than was projected in the last Report and the last Update. Growth in household expenditures, especially on housing and related durable goods such as furniture and appliances, will continue to contribute to economic expansion. Exports are expected to recover substantially in light of the anticipated growth of the US economy. A slowing in the pace of inventory liquidation should also support real GDP growth over this period. Reductions in business investment in the first half are also likely to be smaller than in the last quarter of 2001, given that the amount of excess capacity is projected to decrease.
 
With further strong expansion of the US economy projected for the second half of 2002 and through 2003, robust growth in the demand for Canadian exports should continue. As well, the combination of the earlier easing in domestic monetary conditions and past initiatives to cut taxes and enhance national security should continue to support household spending. These developments have contributed to a recovery in business confidence and should prompt a pickup in business investment. Capital expenditures in the oil and gas sector should also start to recover, owing to the recent pickup in the prices of oil and natural gas.
 
Real GDP in the second half of 2002 is projected to grow between 3 and 4 per cent, above the economy's growth potential of about 3 per cent. This would produce annual average growth for 2002 of 2.25 to 3.25 per cent, almost 2 percentage points higher than projected in January. For 2003, growth on an annual average basis is expected to be between 3 and 4 per cent.
 
Indeed, the Bank's outlook for growth through 2002 and 2003, combined with the unexpected strength of real GDP at the end of last year, implies that the amount of economic slack should be absorbed faster than was anticipated at the time of the last Report. The amount of excess supply is therefore expected to decrease through 2002 and to be eliminated in the second half of 2003.
 
These projections for growth in 2002 and 2003 are broadly in line with the latest private sector forecasts.
 
In the regular survey reported in the Conference Board of Canada's spring Index of Business Confidence, 30 per cent of respondents expected prices, in general, to rise over the next six months at an annual rate of 1 per cent or less, and 87 per cent expected a rate of 2 per cent or less. Indeed, the average private sector forecast for the rate of increase in the total CPI is now 1.4 per cent in 2002 (markedly lower than last autumn). In both cases, short-term expectations for the rise in the total CPI are being influenced by recent reductions in energy prices at the consumer level. Inflation expectations over a two-year horizon, however, continue to be firmly anchored well inside the Bank's inflation-control target range. This has been confirmed by the latest survey of firms conducted by the Bank's regional offices and by the average private sector forecast for total CPI inflation for 2003 (currently at 2.0 per cent). Typical forecasts of longer-term inflation are also clustered around 2 per cent. As well, the differential between 30-year conventional and Real Return bonds is now just above 2 per cent.
 
In addition to the factors discussed above, higher import costs arising from the depreciation of the Canadian dollar over the past two years may continue to put some modest upward pressure on prices through 2003. The effects of higher insurance and other security costs following the 11 September terrorist attacks may be another source of modest upward pressure on prices over the next two years.
 
Given current and anticipated conditions in labour markets, wage gains are expected to hold relatively steady over the next two years. The Bank's latest survey of firms is consistent with this outlook. With productivity growth expected to remain around 2 per cent, growth in unit labour costs should be little changed through 2003.
 
The growth rates of the three narrow money aggregates, M1, M1+, and M1++, have trended up since the November Report, but eased off somewhat in February. This increase has been relatively widespread across households, businesses, and account types. Strong money growth over this period is largely due to the easing in monetary conditions. Low rates of return on other assets, such as term deposits and GICs, have reduced the opportunity cost of holding liquid balances and have therefore contributed to very strong growth in the narrow money aggregates. Also contributing to strong year-over-year growth rates in narrow money are the high precautionary balances accumulated last autumn in the face of uncertainty about future income and stock market returns. With uncertainty diminishing, there are early signs that businesses and, to a lesser extent, households have begun to unwind these balances. To the extent that they are used in the future to purchase financial assets rather than goods and services, they are not an indication of immediate inflation pressure.
 
The difficulties of distinguishing between the effects of lower interest rates and an increased appetite for liquidity have significantly increased the uncertainty surrounding forecasts of output and inflation based on the narrow money aggregates. As uncertainty dissipates and rates of return on other assets recover, growth of the narrow money aggregates will likely decline further. The possibility that more of the liquid balances than expected will be spent on goods and services, rather than reinvested in savings instruments, represents an upside risk to inflation.
 
Growth in M2++ has been much slower and more stable than growth in the narrow aggregates since the last Report. This is consistent with the portfolio shifts mentioned earlier, since the strong growth that was seen in the transactions components of M2++ has been offset by declines in savings instruments such as term deposits and Canada Savings Bonds. Broad money is currently growing at a rate that is roughly consistent with inflation of 2 per cent.
 
With the economy expected to remain in a position of modest excess supply through 2002, some downward pressure on core inflation should persist over the remainder of the year. Several factors will likely limit this influence, however. First, longer-term inflation expectations are still very close to 2 per cent. Second, current and projected increases in unit labour costs are also in this range. Finally, higher import costs arising from the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar may put some further temporary upward pressure on inflation.
 
With less economic slack than was expected in the last Report, the core rate is now projected to average just under 2 per cent in the second half of this year and the first half of 2003, before moving back to 2 per cent by about the end of 2003. This would be consistent with the economy projected to be back to potential output in the second half of 2003.
 
If crude oil prices continue to average between US$22 and US$26 per barrel, total consumer price inflation should stay below the core rate through mid-year. The Bank is projecting that total inflation, like core inflation, will be at 2 per cent by about the end of 2003.
 
In the past several months, it has become increasingly apparent that robust economic growth is resuming in North America. For Canada, the outlook presented in this Report shows the economy moving back to potential output in the second half of 2003, with inflation at the Bank's 2 per cent target by the end of 2003.
 
There are both upside and downside risks to this outlook. Given the amount of monetary and fiscal stimulus that has been provided, growth could be stronger than projected. It is also possible that the growth of household spending may not be as strong as anticipated, to the extent that even more of the recent strength in spending than assumed was, in fact, borrowed from future expenditures. There is continuing uncertainty regarding the timing and strength of the pickup in business investment and exports, mainly because of the fragility of global business confidence. And political developments in the Middle East may continue to affect crude oil prices, with possible repercussions for the global economy.
 
Given these factors, the task for monetary policy will be to gauge the strength of the economy as it approaches its capacity to produce, and the implications for future inflation. This means reducing the amount of monetary stimulus in a timely and measured manner in order to keep inflation close to its 2 per cent target, thereby helping to sustain economic growth at full capacity over the medium term.