The world economy is expected to gather strength following a weak start to 2016, particularly in the United States and China. The broad growth profile remains consistent with that of the April Monetary Policy Report, although the Bank's projections have been marked down modestly, mainly in view of the foreseeable macroeconomic effects of the UK referendum vote to exit from the European Union . Overall, global economic growth is expected to rise from about 3 per cent this year to 3 1/2 per cent in 2017-18. Considerable uncertainty surrounds the Brexit process, however, as well as its outcome and the broader political ramifications. This uncertainty is likely to weigh on the decisions of businesses and households for some time to come.
 
The result of the UK referendum triggered a sharp but orderly repricing of a number of asset classes in global financial markets. Safe-haven flows contributed to exchange rate movements, notably an appreciation of the US dollar and the yen against the pound and the euro. Yields on highly rated government bonds fell to record lows as a result of the flight to safety, as well as on expectations that central bank actions will lead to a longer period of accommodative monetary policy. The global financial system remained resilient: markets continued to function normally, including funding markets, with movements largely stabilizing in the days following the referendum. Market sentiment remains fragile, however, because of ongoing uncertainty about the strength of the global economy.
 
US economic activity in early 2016 expanded at a more modest pace than expected, largely indicating a sharper-than-anticipated contraction in business investment in the energy sector. Equipment investment outside the energy sector also declined unexpectedly, in large part reflecting the temporary weakness in global demand. Nonetheless, incoming data suggest that growth will rebound: job gains have averaged about 150,000 over the past three months, a pace consistent with a falling unemployment rate; initial claims for unemployment insurance have fallen below pre-crisis lows; and both the job openings rate and the growth in the number of establishments have been trending up.
 
US economic growth is expected to average around 2 per cent over the projection horizon, with the strong labour market and accommodative monetary policy continuing to support private domestic demand. High levels of consumer confidence and healthy employment are expected to boost consumption growth above the growth of disposable income. While uncertainty associated with Brexit may weigh on confidence and cloud the outlook for business prospects, investment is expected to pick up in the second half of 2016 as the drag from energy investment and the strong US dollar diminishes, domestic demand remains solid and global growth improves.
 
Growth in the euro area has been marked down beyond 2016 in light of the UK referendum result, which is likely to lead to weaker confidence, tighter credit conditions and reduced bilateral trade. In Japan, authorities have announced additional fiscal stimulus, including a delay in a sales tax hike in response to ongoing weakness in private demand growth. Both the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan have continued to implement unconventional monetary policy measures to support growth. Economic growth in the euro area and Japan is expected to average around 1 1/2 per cent and less than 1 per cent, respectively, over the projection horizon. Growth in both regions continues to be tempered by weak investment and structural factors, including labour market rigidities.
 
Economic growth in China slowed more sharply in early 2016 than expected in April, to around 4.5 per cent (quarter-over-quarter annualized). The slowdown was primarily the result of weakness in net exports and, to a lesser extent, a drag from softer investment in fixed assets in the manufacturing sector - in part because of the ongoing restructuring in industries with excess capacity, such as steel. However, strong credit growth in the early part of the year and additional fiscal stimulus are expected to support growth in the second half of 2016. Residential investment has been stronger than expected, suggesting more underlying momentum. Growth in China is projected to stabilize at around 6 1/2 per cent over the 2016-18 period, although rising corporate debt is exacerbating financial vulnerabilities.
 
Among other oil-importing emerging-market economies , conditions in the first half of the year in certain distressed economies (notably Brazil) improved by more than expected. Growth in oil-importing EMEs is expected to pick up over 2017-18 as progress is made on structural reforms, particularly the removal of regulatory obstacles to growth. This growth profile is now expected to be softer than in April, however, especially in light of recent increases in oil prices.
 
The projection for growth in the rest-of-the-world  grouping has been revised down significantly since April. In some oil-exporting EMEs, the adjustment to low oil prices has been more severe and protracted than previously anticipated, notwithstanding the recent increase in oil prices. Growth is expected to recover as the adjustment in these economies progresses.
 
There is gathering evidence that the needed supply-demand adjustment in the global oil market is progressing. In this context, the upside risks to oil prices identified in previous Reports have already partially materialized: the price assumption has risen by about US$10 per barrel relative to the April Report, although this increase was also partly a result of temporary supply disruptions. By convention, the Bank assumes that oil prices will remain near their recent average levels: US$50, US$49 and US$36 per barrel, respectively, for Brent, West Texas Intermediate and Western Canada Select. The substantial reductions in investment since 2014, coupled with rising demand, continue to pose an upside risk to prices over the projection horizon, although ongoing cost-cutting initiatives and technological advances limit this upside potential.
 
The projected stability of the non-energy commodity price index masks divergent pressures on component prices. Lumber prices are expected to be a source of strength, benefiting from stronger housing markets in the United States and China. In contrast, there is the potential for downward pressure on base metals prices as several new mining projects come on line globally.
 
The projected path of the Bank's foreign activity measure, which is an indicator of demand for Canadian exports, has been revised down to reflect a less-favourable composition of US economic activity, in particular, weaker business investment. Growth in the foreign activity measure improves starting in the second half of 2016 as a result of the anticipated rebound in US business investment.
 
By convention, the Canadian dollar is assumed to be close to its recent average of 77 cents, similar to the assumption of 76 cents in April.
 
The Canadian economy continues to adjust to low commodity prices. The reallocation of investment and employment from the resource sector to the non-resource sector is progressing. Starting in the second half of 2016, real GDP is expected to increase at a rate that exceeds potential growth, driven by solid US domestic demand growth and federal infrastructure spending and other fiscal measures. The outlook for real GDP is also supported by accommodative monetary and financial conditions and the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar.
 
While the fundamental elements of the growth projection are similar to those presented in April, the forecast for real GDP growth has been revised down. Downward revisions to investment and exports more than offset the positive economic effects of the recent increase in oil prices. The output gap is expected to close somewhat later than forecast in April, toward the end of 2017. The Bank expects inflation to average close to 2 per cent throughout 2017 as the output gap narrows.
 
Economic growth has been uneven in recent quarters, fluctuating around the rate of potential output growth. This volatility mainly reflects an uneven timing of trade flows and household expenditures. Economic activity expanded by 2.4 per cent in the first quarter of 2016 but is estimated to have contracted by 1.0 per cent in the second quarter. The quarterly variability is exacerbated by the economic effects of the devastating wildfires in Alberta, which are estimated to have subtracted about 1 percentage point from GDP growth in the second quarter. A marked rebound is expected in the third quarter as oil production resumes and the rebuilding effort gets under way in the Fort McMurray area. Also contributing to the rebound are the new Canada Child Benefit, which lends support to consumption, and a boost from government infrastructure spending. Average growth over the second and third quarters is estimated to be about 1 1/4 per cent, softer than anticipated in the April Report.
 
Estimates from the Bank's two measures of economic slack (the structural and statistical approaches) point to material excess capacity. Similarly, firms participating in the Bank's summer Business Outlook Survey reported that pressures on production capacity and the incidence of labour shortages continue to be low. Labour market indicators suggest continuing slack. For instance, youth participation rates are near their post-recession lows, and wage growth remains subdued, particularly in industries that produce goods. Looking through the temporary weakness associated with the Alberta wildfires, the Bank judges that the excess capacity in the economy in the second quarter was between about 1 per cent and 2 per cent.
 
Total CPI inflation remains in the lower half of the Bank's inflation-control range. Downward pressure from low consumer energy prices and persistent excess capacity are being partially offset by the temporary boost from the pass-through of the earlier exchange rate depreciation. Most measures of core inflation remain close to 2 per cent but would be lower without the effect of exchange rate pass-through. The near-term outlook for inflation has been revised up, reflecting firmer-than-assumed oil prices.
 
The expansion of activity in the non-resource sector will assert itself as the dominant trend in the second half of 2016 as the drag from declining investment in the energy sector wanes. Increased foreign demand and fiscal spending, as well as the effects of the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar, are expected to lift real GDP growth. In addition, monetary and financial conditions remain accommodative and the yield curve has flattened, in line with recent developments in global financial markets.
 
Real GDP is expected to grow by 1.3 per cent in 2016, 2.2 per cent in 2017 and 2.1 per cent in 2018. This projection for GDP growth is marked down from April. A more subdued investment profile, reflecting (in roughly equal parts) a downward revision to historical data and heightened caution in the face of uncertain demand prospects, lowers the trajectory of both real GDP and potential output. In addition, exports have been revised down in response to relatively weaker foreign demand, exacerbated by the effects on trade of the UK referendum. These downward revisions are partially offset by higher oil prices, which result in a modest rebound in Canada's terms of trade and a boost in real gross domestic income and consumption.
 
The restructuring of the resource sector in response to low commodity prices is proceeding. Firms in the oil and gas sector have significantly reduced investment and employment. Capital spending plans suggest that the contraction of investment spending in the oil and gas sector will be nearly complete by the end of the year, at which time the level of investment in that sector will be about 60 per cent below its 2014 level. Other aspects of the restructuring, such as the shifting of employment opportunities across regions, are likely to continue for some time.
 
Oil prices remain below the full-cycle break-even cost for many producers. In particular, prices remain below levels at which new investment projects in the oil sands are likely to be profitable, even with the recent increase. Nevertheless, oil sands production should continue to increase modestly as previously committed projects are completed and come on line.
 
Growth in non-energy commodity exports is expected to remain subdued. Prices for base metals remain low, and excess supply and competitiveness challenges will persist in dampening production and investment spending in the sector. At the same time, conditions are more favourable for some other non-energy commodities: exports of building materials should continue to strengthen as the US housing market keeps on expanding, and agricultural production and exports will benefit from increasing global food demand.
 
An important aspect of the ongoing adjustment to lower commodity prices is the sequence of stronger non-commodity exports leading to increased investment, net firm creation and a rise in employment opportunities. This sequence is progressing, albeit unevenly.
 
Recent monthly data on goods exports have disappointed. Looking through the monthly volatility, the Bank projects that the steady trend increase in non-commodity exports since the 2009 trough will continue. Non-commodity exports are expected to exceed the pre-recession peak starting next year.
 
Solid foreign demand and the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar will continue to support non-commodity exports. The profile for non-commodity exports has nevertheless been revised down, reflecting in part an unexpected but temporary slowdown in US investment earlier this year. Non-commodity export growth is expected to be slightly stronger in 2017-18, but the level of non-commodity exports remains somewhat lower at the end of 2018.
 
The projected growth profile for non-commodity exports relies on historical relationships between non-commodity exports, foreign demand and the value of the Canadian dollar. The prolonged period of disappointing global growth and weak demand for Canadian exports caused some firms to exit and a permanent loss of capacity. As a result, the response of exports to improving demand and competitiveness may take longer to materialize should investment in new capacity be required. In addition, the timing and magnitude of the benefits from the dollar's earlier depreciation will vary across industries and will depend on the competitive position of other countries.
 
Some of the more exchange-rate-sensitive categories of exports have been strengthening.  The results of the spring 2016 EDC Trade Confidence Index Survey published by Export Development Canada and the Bank's summer Business Outlook Survey provide corroborating evidence of tangible positive effects of the lower dollar for Canadian exporters. Firms in the service industry that participated in the BOS anticipate robust sales, since many of them are benefiting from increasing foreign demand.
 
Improved exports are expected to lead to more business investment, net firm creation and hiring. The latest data on the population of firms show encouraging growth of 2 per cent (year-over-year) in the first quarter of 2016, reflecting both an increase in the number of new firms and a decrease in the number of exiting firms. As well, capacity pressures have increased in much of the manufacturing sector, and financing conditions remain favourable. In addition, the past depreciation of the dollar has boosted margins and cash flow denominated in Canadian dollars, providing funding to expand investment spending.
 
These supportive business conditions have not yet translated into strong investment, likely because of uncertainty over future demand prospects and structural challenges. Consequently, the projection for investment growth has been marked down since April, with a small negative impact on potential output. Nevertheless, as both foreign and domestic demand increase, industries outside the resource sector will need to invest to expand production. By the end of the year, non-resource investment is expected to dominate, resulting in an expansion of total business investment, and contribute to rebuilding capacity and increasing potential output. Over the projection horizon, investment in machinery and equipment as a share of output should begin to recover.
 
Consumption is projected to grow at a moderate pace, supported by continued employment growth in the non-resource sector and federal fiscal measures (notably, the Canada Child Benefit). A comparison of employment and retail sales across regions illustrates divergent adjustments to low oil prices, with households in the energy-producing provinces cutting expenditures sharply.
 
Over the projection horizon, real GDI is expected to rise with real GDP. While household expenditures will continue to be restrained by the ongoing wealth and income effects of the past decline in Canada's terms of trade, the impact is expected to gradually diminish.
 
In the housing market, new construction and resale activity remain robust in British Columbia and Ontario, supported by strong demand, in part attributable to population and employment growth. The same factors are fuelling house price increases in these regions, particularly the greater Vancouver and Toronto areas. Sharply rising prices in these markets over the past year raise the possibility that prices are also being driven by self-reinforcing expectations, making them more sensitive to an adverse shock to housing demand. In contrast, housing activity and house prices in the energy-producing provinces have declined; elsewhere in the country, housing growth has been modest, with most markets appearing balanced. Over the projection horizon, the contribution of residential investment to real GDP growth is anticipated to decrease and household sector vulnerabilities to stabilize.
 
Real GDP growth is projected to exceed potential output growth from the second half of 2016. The output gap is expected to close somewhat later than indicated in April, toward the end of 2017. The timing of the closing of the gap is highly uncertain and is influenced by downward revisions to both the projection for real GDP and potential output. The profile for potential output depends on the projection for investment spending, and both are currently subject to unusual uncertainty as a result of the economy's ongoing complex structural adjustment as well as the difficult-to-forecast effect of Brexit.
 
Total CPI inflation is projected to remain below 2 per cent through 2016 as disinflationary pressures associated with weak consumer energy prices and excess capacity more than offset the inflationary effects of exchange rate pass-through. The effects of these factors will gradually dissipate, and total CPI inflation is expected to average close to 2 per cent in 2017 as the output gap narrows.
 
The near-term forecast for total CPI inflation is revised up from April, reflecting higher oil prices and some temporary factors. These factors include a revised view of the evolution of gasoline prices and tax changes.
 
Medium-term inflation expectations remain well anchored. The June Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation is 1.6 per cent in 2016 and 2.1 per cent in 2017.
 
Based on the past dispersion of private sector forecasts, a reasonable range around the base-case projection for total CPI inflation is ±0.3 percentage points. This range is intended to convey a sense of forecast uncertainty. A complementary perspective is provided using statistical analysis of the Bank's forecast errors, which suggests that a 50 per cent confidence interval around the base-case projection widens from ±0.3 percentage points in the third quarter of 2016 to ±0.6 percentage points by the end of 2018. Over the same period, a 90 per cent confidence band widens from ±0.6 to ±1.5 percentage points.
 
The outlook for inflation is subject to several risks emanating from both the external environment and the domestic economy. Overall, the Bank judges that the risks to the projected path for inflation are roughly balanced. However, economic and geopolitical uncertainties have clearly risen in the wake of the Brexit vote. While the foreseeable consequences are incorporated into the Bank's base-case projection, there may be wider ramifications that are difficult to forecast at this early stage and are therefore not included.
 
Many of the risks mentioned in recent Reports remain important, although two that were identified in April-stronger momentum for Canadian exports and a more pronounced adjustment of the Canadian economy to low energy prices - are now viewed as less likely to materialize.
 
Business investment has been unexpectedly weak across a number of advanced economies, including the United States and Canada. The lacklustre pace of business spending has been assumed to reflect mostly cyclical factors, such as slower growth of global demand and heightened uncertainty. But the weakness could also signal that demographic forces or some other structural factors are more relevant than previously estimated. Such factors would suggest a dimmer outlook for non-resource business investment in Canada than presented in the base-case projection. Weaker business investment would also reduce capital deepening and lower potential output, partially mitigating the disinflationary effect of weaker demand.
 
Household spending is expected to grow moderately over the projection horizon, but a number of circumstances could lead to less robust spending than anticipated. Consumer sentiment remains lacklustre in the energy-producing provinces. At the same time, because households have become more indebted, their spending may be more sensitive to adverse shocks. Recent housing market developments, particularly in Vancouver and Toronto and adjacent areas have exacerbated vulnerabilities in the household sector, increasing the likelihood and severity of a retrenchment in consumption should a house price correction occur.
 
Strengthening demand, as well as supply constraints, could contribute to higher oil prices, although ongoing cost-cutting initiatives and technological advances would limit this upside potential. Growth in demand for gasoline has been robust in many major economies, especially the United States, suggesting that demand for oil may increase faster than expected. At the same time, persistently low investment in new oil projects since 2014 has significantly reduced prospects for supply growth. Shale oil production in the United States has declined substantially, and conventional oil production in other non-OPEC countries, including Canada, has been decreasing. Future production capacity may not be sufficient to meet demand, putting upward pressure on prices. Higher-than-expected oil prices would contribute to an improvement in Canada's terms of trade, providing a positive boost to wealth and household spending in Canada.
 
Slower growth in EMEs is a downside risk, particularly in those that hold high levels of foreign-currency-denominated debt and in commodity exporters facing fiscal and other pressures. In China, increased emphasis by the authorities on short-term growth is contributing to a further buildup of financial imbalances. Slower growth in EMEs could affect Canada through several channels, including lower commodity prices, weaker export sales, increased uncertainty and financial market volatility.
 
The downward revisions to the April Report's projection of potential GDP growth in the United States could reflect an overly conservative interpretation of labour market and productivity trends. Productivity in the United States may rise more than expected if the persistent weakness in US growth includes a larger-than-estimated cyclical element. In particular, the ongoing recovery could lead to an acceleration in the rate of firm creation and more technological innovation. As well, the strong labour market and the creation of new businesses may draw more discouraged workers back into the labour force than expected. Any of these developments would raise the potential growth rate of the US economy, boosting real GDP growth. Stronger US economic growth could have positive spillovers to Canada from greater demand for Canadian exports and improved global confidence.