At the time of the November 2000 Monetary Policy Report, although signs of the anticipated slowing of the US economy were becoming apparent, the momentum of the global economy was considered strong.
 
The US slowdown has, in fact, turned out to be more pronounced than expected, and, largely as a consequence, growth in global demand has been weaker than projected. A weaker global economy, together with declines in energy prices from earlier peaks, has reduced the risk of inflationary pressures worldwide.
 
The abrupt easing in the pace of US economic expansion, particularly in the markets for motor vehicles and for information and telecommunications equipment, contributed importantly to a slowing in economic growth in Canada towards the end of last year and into 2001. The pace of expansion in both the US and Canadian economies during the first half of this year is now projected to be much weaker than expected last November, as inventory imbalances in those sectors experiencing weaker demand are corrected. As a result, the Canadian economy will probably be operating somewhat below capacity by mid-2001, suggesting some downward pressure on core CPI inflation over the remainder of the year.
 
To support a rebound in the growth of aggregate demand in the second half of this year and in 2002, the Bank of Canada lowered its Bank Rate by 25 basis points on the 23 January announcement date, by 50 basis points on 6 March, and by 25 basis points on 17 April. These actions brought the Bank Rate down to 5.0 per cent and the target for the overnight rate to 4.75 per cent. These moves were consistent with the policy objective of keeping inflation close to the midpoint of the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent target range over the medium term.
 
The main uncertainty facing the Canadian economy is the timing and strength of the rebound in the US economy. While the Bank expects a significant pickup in US growth in the second half of 2001 and some further strengthening in 2002, the abruptness and extent of the slowdown highlight the downside risk that the rebound in aggregate demand in the United States may take longer to take hold.
 
Since last autumn, core CPI inflation has moved up to the mid-point of the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control target range slightly faster than expected. The rate of increase in the total CPI has remained close to 3 per cent, reflecting primarily the increases in energy prices over the past year.
 
The 12-month rate of increase in the core CPI was 2.0 per cent in February, up from 1.3 per cent last September and marginally higher than projected in the November Report. Other statistical measures of the trend rate of inflation were just below the core rate.
 
The rise in the core rate of inflation over the past six months was broadly based among the major components of the core CPI.
 
The 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI has remained close to 3 per cent since last autumn, reflecting large increases in energy prices over the year. While the rate of increase in fuel oil and gasoline prices has eased over this period, tight supplies of natural gas have led to a substantial jump in overall energy prices. Food prices have also risen considerably in recent months, particularly for beef, pork, and vegetables.
 
To date, the pass-through of first-round effects from higher energy costs to the core CPI have remained small. The estimated effect was less than 0.1 per cent over the past year and was most evident in the prices of both local and air transportation.
 
The surge in the prices of Canada's energy commodities between the end of 1999 and the end of 2000 helps to account for the substantial rise over that period in the chain price index for GDP relative to the core CPI.
 
The prices of non-energy commodities, after easing between May and October of last year, have remained steady in recent months. The slowdown in world economic growth contributed to a further decrease in the prices of metals and pulp, but livestock prices have moved up in response to strengthening demand and reduced supplies in Europe (owing to foot-and-mouth disease).
 
The pace of Canada's economic expansion slowed in the final quarter of 2000, mainly in response to an abrupt slowing in US economic growth. After increasing by 4.5 per cent on average over the first three quarters, real GDP in Canada rose at an annual rate of only 2.6 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2000. With lower-than-anticipated growth in the fourth quarter and downward revisions to real GDP in the first three quarters of the year, economic activity in 2000 rose by 4.7 per cent on an annual average basis - less than the 5 per cent pace expected at the time of the February Update. Available information suggests that real GDP growth for the first quarter of 2001 will be in a range of 1.25 to 2.25 per cent, with robust gains in final domestic demand partly offset by sluggish exports and further reductions in inventory investment.
 
The downturn in the US auto market led to reduced Canadian automotive exports and production in the fourth quarter of 2000 and in early 2001, as manufacturers began to bring inventory levels into balance. This contributed to cutbacks in the output of related industries such as primary metals and motor vehicle parts. In addition, as the rate of expansion of spending on machinery and equipment by US businesses fell sharply, the growth in Canadian shipments of electronic products and other machinery and equipment eased considerably from the extremely buoyant pace of the first half of the year. Concerned about high inventory levels, Canadian manufacturers of electrical and electronic products have reduced their rates of production.
 
Investment in capital goods by Canadian business, particularly in highly import-intensive computers and other machinery and equipment, appears to be recovering after falling off in the last three months of 2000. In contrast, household expenditures remained robust through year-end and into 2001, supported by continued high levels of consumer confidence, solid employment growth, and federal and provincial government tax reductions.
 
A number of indicators support the view that pressures in product and labour markets intensified during the first three quarters of last year, and that the Canadian economy was operating in excess demand during the second half of last year. The increases in core inflation and in wage rates over the past six months are consistent with this view. The Bank's conventional measures of potential output and the output gap also suggest that the Canadian economy was operating slightly above potential output at the end of 2000. Statistics Canada's measured rate of capacity utilization in the non-farm, goods-producing sector in the fourth quarter of 2000 was only slightly below the level reached in the late 1980s, when pressures on capacity were high. Vacancy rates in the apartment and commercial real estate markets are also below previous lows reached in the late 1980s.
 
More recent indicators, however, point to capacity pressures easing in early 2001. Consistent with the slowing we have seen in the pace of activity to below the economy's growth potential, the estimated output gap would be approaching zero in the first quarter of 2001. The ratio of unfilled orders to shipments in the manufacturing sector has fallen in recent months. Purchasing managers have reported reductions in delivery time, and the level of inventories relative to sales has risen. Finally, anecdotal reports of labour shortages have diminished since December, although upward wage pressures persist in certain sectors and professions.
 
Overall, the full range of indicators suggests that the economy was operating at, or slightly above, full capacity at the end of last year, but that these pressures have eased through the first half of 2001.
 
Based on both the average hourly earnings of permanent workers and labour compensation per person-hour in the business sector, it appears that the underlying rate of increase in average labour compensation moved up into a range between 3.25 and 3.75 per cent in the second half of 2000 and into the early part of 2001. The rise in labour compensation per person-hour in the business sector last year was boosted by unusually large bonus payments. Labour productivity growth eased considerably in the second half of 2000 as a result of the slowdown in economic expansion, with output per person-hour in the business sector increasing by only 0.7 per cent between the fourth quarter of 1999 and the fourth quarter of 2000. As a result, the year-over-year rise in unit labour costs in the business sector was 3.1 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2000.
 
It is often the case that large movements in real estate prices, which typically reflect shifts in both inflation expectations and economic growth, precede substantial changes in core inflation. No such large movements have been observed recently. The year-over-year increase in the selling price of existing housing (based on the Royal LePage index) was 4.4 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2000, down somewhat from the rate seen at the end of 1999. The 12-month rise in new-home prices remained steady at 2.4 per cent in February. Gains in the prices of non-residential commercial properties last year were moderate and slightly higher than in 1999.
 
Since the November Report, the Bank Rate has been lowered on three occasions by a total of 100 basis points. The timing and magnitude of the policy-rate declines had been largely anticipated in financial markets. Indeed, reductions in the 90-day commercial paper rate occurred prior to the central bank actions. Since November, the 90-day paper rate has declined by about 125 basis points to around 4.65 per cent and embodies expectations of further Bank Rate reductions of about 25 basis points by the end of the second quarter. In the United States, financial market participants expect the Federal Reserve Board to lower the federal funds target rate by about an additional 50 basis points by the end of the second quarter in addition to the 150 basis points of cuts so far this year.
 
Yield spreads between Canadian and US government securities turned positive for maturities of 2 to 30 years in late 2000, and subsequently widened out. This is consistent with market expectations of a sharper slowdown in the United States than in Canada, but it also reflects an increased preference for US-dollar assets, as global investors have sought the safety and liquidity of US financial markets at a time of uncertainty.
 
This shift in investor sentiment has also been reflected in the strength of the US dollar against all major currencies. A number of recent developments have been behind this change in sentient: volatility in global equity markets; the slowdown in the global economy; the situation in several emerging-market economies; and concern about the direction of macroeconomic and structural policies in certain industrial countries.
 
Primarily reflecting these market swings, the Canadian dollar has declined from about 67 cents at the turn of the year to around 64 cents more recently. Compared with other major currencies, however, the Canadian dollar has remained quite firm.
 
With declining short-term interest rates and a lower Canadian dollar, monetary conditions have eased substantially since the November Report.
 
The end of 2000 also saw a general tightening in North American financial conditions. As investors became more concerned about prospects for economic growth, risk premiums rose and credit standards tightened, particularly in the United States. Yields on corporate bonds climbed, not only for lower-quality bonds, but also for blue-chip issues. The stock market was also affected as the correction in technology stocks continued.
 
There have, however, been signs of improvement in financial conditions more recently, partly because of interest rate cuts by both the US Federal Reserve and the Bank of Canada. There appears to be underlying confidence that policy actions will limit the extent of the economic slowdown as evidenced by the yields on medium - and longer-term Canadian government bonds, which have fallen less than yields on short-term bonds (and, in some cases, have even increased).
 
Reflecting the past tightening in financial conditions, growth in Canadian business credit has slowed in recent months. Moreover, with increased uncertainty over the economic outlook, firms are favouring longer-term financing. As a result, growth in short-term business credit was quite weak in January and February, but growth in bonds has been picking up. Investors have also shifted funds from equity markets into bonds, leading to a decline in bond rates. Weakness in short-term business credit may also reflect lower demand for financing, stemming from a slower pace of inventory investment and a decline in the number of mergers and acquisitions.
 
Projections of world economic growth for 2001 have been revised down in recent months, reflecting a slower pace of growth not only in the United States but in most other parts of the world as well. For example, the International Monetary Fund now projects world output to expand by just over 3.0 per cent this year - down a full percentage point from its outlook last autumn. Its current projection for 2001 compares with actual world economic growth of 4.8 per cent in 2000, 3.4 per cent in 1999, and 2.6 per cent in 1998 (at the height of the Asian crisis).
 
Last November, the anticipated slowing in US economic growth in response to earlier increases in interest rates and persistently higher energy prices appeared to be underway. In fact, the slowdown has turned out to be greater than expected. Average growth in the last two quarters of 2000 was only 1.6 per cent, less than one-third of the pace recorded in the first two quarters of the year. Business investment has weakened, following reductions in corporate profits, tightening in business credit conditions, and substantial declines in equity markets. Falling equity prices, lower employment growth, and high energy prices have also caused sharp declines in consumer confidence and reduced consumption growth. This weakness in demand has led to product cutbacks in the manufacturing sector, primarily in automobiles and electronics (telecommunications and computer equipment) to correct inventory imbalances.
 
While new inventory-management techniques have resulted in lower general inventory levels in recent years, they have also allowed firms to quickly adjust production when excess inventories become apparent. The current slowdown in manufacturing production is thus expected to be relatively short, with stronger growth projected for the second half of the year and into 2002. Indeed, the inventory correction in the automobile sector was well advanced by the end of the first quarter. Other factors that are expected to contribute to a pickup in the second half include lower energy prices and the decline in interest rates, both of which should help to restore consumer and business confidence. If, however, there was continued weakness in consumer and business confidence, this could translate into lower spending and delayed recovery.
 
Overall, it is the Bank's assessment that the US economy will grow by between 1.0 to 2.0 per cent on an annual average basis this year, with growth in the second half of the year averaging 2.0 to 3.0 per cent. In 2002, the Bank projects US economic growth of 2.5 to 3.5 per cent.
 
In Japan, economic recovery continues to be restrained primarily by ongoing problems associated with financial sector restructuring. These problems, together with the impact of the slowdown in the United States, brought growth in the second half of 2000 down near zero, and only a small positive growth rate is projected for 2001. The major European economies, by contrast, continue to exhibit positive momentum although at a somewhat slower pace, with growth in 2001 expected to centre on 2.5 per cent. Growth in the emerging-market economies, particularly in Latin America and in those Asian economies that are heavily dependent on the manufacture of electronics, has been adversely affected by the US slowdown. As well, both Turkey and Argentina face financial difficulties and are working with the IMF on new policy initiatives.
 
Crude oil prices are likely to ease further through 2001, as inventories are rebuilt and demand softens with the recent slowdown in the pace of world economic activity. Natural gas prices are also expected to fall from their current high levels in coming months, given the expected replenishment of stocks. With some lessening in the growth of global demand, prices for non-energy commodities are unlikely to rise appreciably through the remainder of 2001.
 
The Bank continues to project a strengthening of Canadian economic growth in the second half of this year and in 2002. This view reflects a number of factors: a second-half rebound in the US economy; the completion of the inventory correction; continued investment in new technology by businesses; recent tax cuts; and the easing in domestic monetary conditions.
 
Reductions in personal income taxes, which took effect at the beginning of this year, as well as recent decreases in interest rates, should both contribute to fairly robust growth in household spending. There is some risk that slower employment growth and recent drops in equity prices could weaken consumer confidence, tempering increases in household expenditures. In the early part of 2001, however, the pace of household spending remained strong.
 
The pace of business investment is projected to moderate in 2001. Firms are expected to focus on capital projects that help reduce costs, although investments to raise Canada's future capacity to supply energy should grow strongly during the year. Further reductions in inventory investment to bring stock levels into balance are likely in the first half of this year. Import growth is also expected to ease during this period, chiefly reflecting limited gains in both aggregate exports and investment in machinery and equipment.
 
Canadian export growth is expected to be modest in the first half of 2001, in line with the anticipated sluggishness of the US economy and the continued weak prices projected for non-energy commodities. In particular, automotive shipments to the United States are likely to fall further during the period, while the growth in exports of information and communications equipment is expected to ease considerably. Canadian export growth should improve, after mid-year, with the projected recovery in the US economy.
 
The latest consensus among private sector forecasters for real GDP growth this year (on an annual average basis) has been revised down to 2.4 per cent, considerably lower than the 3.5 per cent recorded at the time of the November Report. For 2002, the most recent consensus forecast calls for real GDP growth of 3.3 per cent.
 
Since the February Update, the economic information on the first half of 2001 has been mixed, with both positive and negative indicators. On balance, the data confirm the slowdown in the first half of the year anticipated in the Update. It now looks as if growth over the first six months will average between 1.25 and 2.25 per cent. For the second half of the year, we see growth picking up significantly to between 2.5 and 3.5 per cent.
 
Based on this first-half/second-half profile, together with the downward revision to GDP in 2000, the Bank's projection for economic growth in 2001 (on an annual average basis) has been revised down to between 2 and 3 per cent. The pace of activity in 2002 is expected to be somewhat stronger than in the second half of 2001, with the economy expanding at a rate slightly above the Bank's estimate of potential output growth of 3 per cent. This outlook is not expected to be materially affected by forthcoming changes in the measurement of GDP.
 
In the regular survey reported in the Conference Board of Canada's winter Index of Business Confidence, 52 per cent of respondents expected prices, in general, to rise over the next six months at a rate of 2 per cent or less, and 92 per cent expected a rate of 3 per cent or less. The average private sector forecast for the rate of increase in the total CPI is 2.4 per cent in 2001 (the same as last autumn) and 2.1 per cent in 2002. Typical forecasts of longer-term inflation are between 1.9 and 2.1 per cent, depending on the horizon.
 
The differential between conventional bonds and Real Return Bonds has widened to slightly above 2 per cent in recent months. The supply factors affecting government bond markets continue to make it difficult to extract precise information from this measure. Nevertheless, the differential does not suggest any marked change in long-run inflation expectations since the November Report.
 
The pass-through to the core CPI of the substantial increases in the prices of crude oil and natural gas over the past two years is expected to exert some upward pressure on inflation, although this effect is expected to be modest and spread over several years. To date, the price effects have been most evident in airfares and local transportation costs.
 
Movements in the prices of crude oil and natural gas will, however, continue to substantially affect the near-term outlook for energy prices at the consumer level and therefore for the total CPI. If crude oil prices remain below US$30 per barrel this year, gasoline and fuel oil prices are likely to fall below year-earlier levels during the second half of the year. On the other hand, both natural gas and electricity prices at the consumer level are expected to be much higher this year than in 2000.
 
The depreciation of the Canadian dollar since the beginning of last year is also a potential source of upward pressure on inflation over the next year and a half. It is unclear, however, how important this risk to inflation might be, since earlier episodes of large changes in the exchange rate during the 1990s were characterized by low exchange rate pass-through to the CPI in Canada and in many other industrial countries.
 
Despite slower output growth in some sectors, labour markets remain tight and profitability was very high at the end of last year, suggesting that wages will continue to grow at, or slightly above, current rates. Moreover, feedback from businesses contacted by the Bank's regional offices indicates that wage increases are expected to rise over the next 12 months. Productivity gains over the current period of economic slowdown may also be modest, implying that increases in unit labour costs are likely to stay relatively high in the first half of the year.
 
The money aggregates suggest a somewhat stronger outlook for output and inflation than the Bank's overall projection. Although there has been some slowdown in the narrow aggregates in recent months, growth remains strong. On a year-over-year basis, growth in gross M1 was about 14 per cent in February, while growth in M1+ and M1++ was 11 and 8 per cent, respectively. A number of special factors continue to raise the growth of M1 relative to that of transactions balances. Our current assessment of underlying growth is between 6 and 8 per cent.
 
When judgment is applied to take into account various data distortions and the slowing in the US economy, the indicator models based on narrow aggregates would suggest real GDP growth of about 3 per cent in 2001.
 
The model based on narrow money currently forecasts core inflation to rise above 2 per cent in 2001. Forecasts based on the broader aggregate M2++ give a similar profile. Growth in M2++ has continued to be boosted by net contributions to mutual funds. Year-over-year growth in M2++ is about 10 per cent.
 
The expected re-emergence of a modest degree of excess supply in the economy this year should contribute to some downward pressure on core inflation over the remainder of 2001. Two factors, however, are expected to limit the impact of excess supply on the core rate this year. First, longer-term inflation expectations are still very close to 2 per cent - about the same as the current level of core inflation. Second, wage increases are expected to remain steady, or possibly even edge up if current pressures in some sectors and professions become more widespread, while productivity growth may ease, thus putting upward pressure on unit labour costs.
 
On balance, it seems likely that core inflation over the remainder of this year will average somewhat below 2 per cent. In 2002, with the economy projected to grow above potential, these pressures should reverse, with core inflation moving back to 2 per cent towards the end of the year.
 
The rate of increase in the total CPI, currently close to 3 per cent, is expected to move down to 2 per cent by the end of 2001, on the assumption that world energy prices remain close to current levels.
 
At this time, the key issue in the conduct of monetary policy in Canada is the extent of the current slowdown in the pace of economic activity stemming primarily from developments in the United States.
 
The slowdown in economic growth in Canada late last year and in the first half of 2001 has been greater than expected, and the automotive, electrical, and electronic manufacturing sectors in particular, have had to make significant adjustments. It remains the Bank's view that after a first-half slowdown, economic growth will pick up in the second half of the year and in 2002.
 
The latest economic and financial developments support this view. Recent data point to continued growth in overall activity. In addition, current developments are consistent with the view that weakness associated with inventory adjustment will be concentrated in the first half, that business investment in new technology will continue, and that the easing in monetary conditions will support growth.
 
Consistent with this projection for output growth, the Bank sees the development of some downward pressure on core inflation, which will likely average somewhat below 2 per cent over the remainder of this year. If recent large wage increases in some sectors and professions became more widespread, however, they could work to offset this tendency. The anticipated downward pressure on core inflation this year should reverse through 2002 as the economy expands at a rate above its growth potential.
 
The main risk to this outlook for the Canadian economy is the possibility that the US slowdown could be more protracted than anticipated. For example, if consumer and business confidence in the United States does not improve, this could lead to weaker consumption and investment spending. The Bank will have to monitor developments in this area closely.