The outlook for the global economy has deteriorated and uncertainty has increased since October. The sovereign debt crisis in Europe has intensified, conditions in international financial markets have tightened and risk aversion has risen. The recession in Europe is now expected to be deeper and longer than the Bank had anticipated. The Bank continues to assume that European authorities will implement sufficient measures to contain the crisis, although this assumption is clearly subject to downside risks. In the United States, while the rebound in real GDP during the second half of 2011 was stronger than anticipated, the Bank expects the recovery will proceed at a more modest pace going forward, owing to ongoing household deleveraging, fiscal consolidation and the spillovers from Europe. Chinese growth is decelerating, as expected, toward a more sustainable pace. Commodity prices - with the exception of oil - are expected to be below the levels anticipated in October through 2013.
 
The Bank's overall outlook for the Canadian economy is little changed from October. While the economy had more momentum than anticipated in the second half of 2011, the pace of growth going forward is expected to be more modest than previously envisaged, largely due to the external environment. Prolonged uncertainty about the global economic and financial environment is likely to dampen the rate of growth of business investment, albeit to a still solid pace. Net exports are expected to contribute little to growth, reflecting moderate foreign demand and ongoing competitiveness challenges, including the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar. In contrast, very favourable financing conditions are expected to buttress consumer spending and housing activity. Household expenditures are expected to remain high relative to GDP and the ratio of household debt to income is projected to rise further.
 
The Bank estimates that the economy grew by 2.4 per cent in 2011 and projects that it will grow by 2.0 per cent in 2012 and 2.8 per cent in 2013. While the economy appears to be operating with less slack than previously assumed, given the more modest growth profile, the economy is only anticipated to return to full capacity by the third quarter of 2013, one quarter earlier than was expected in October.
 
The dynamics for inflation are similar to those anticipated in October, although the profile for inflation is marginally firmer. Both total and core inflation are expected to moderate in 2012 and subsequently rise, reaching 2 per cent by the third quarter of 2013 as excess supply is slowly absorbed, labour compensation grows modestly and inflation expectations remain well-anchored.
 
Several significant upside and downside risks are present in the inflation outlook for Canada.
 
The three main upside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the possibility of stronger-than-expected inflationary pressures in the global economy, stronger-than-expected growth in the US economy and stronger momentum in Canadian household spending.
 
The two main downside risks to inflation in Canada relate to sovereign debt and banking concerns in Europe and the possibility that growth in Canadian household spending could be weaker than projected.
 
Overall, the Bank judges that these risks are roughly balanced over the projection horizon.
 
Reflecting all of these factors, on 17 January, the Bank maintained the target for the overnight rate at 1 per cent. With the target interest rate near historic lows and the financial system functioning well, there is considerable monetary policy stimulus in Canada. The Bank will continue to monitor carefully economic and financial developments in the Canadian and global economies, together with the evolution of risks, and set monetary policy consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target over the medium term.
 
The outlook for the global economy has deteriorated and uncertainty has increased since the October Monetary Policy Report. The sovereign debt crisis in Europe and the associated pressures on the banking sector have intensified, and the global ramifications through financial, trade and confidence effects are expanding. Conditions in international financial markets have tightened and risk aversion has increased, weighing on the prospects for global economic growth. Limited progress in rebalancing world demand is also contributing to the global slowdown as deficient demand in the major advanced economies is not being sufficiently offset by increased demand from emerging-market economies. Overall, global economic growth is projected to average roughly 3 per cent per year through 2013.
 
The recession in the euro area is now expected to last longer and to be somewhat deeper than anticipated in the October Report, owing to tighter credit conditions, additional fiscal austerity measures and more negative confidence effects. The Bank's base-case scenario assumes that European authorities will implement the measures required to contain the crisis, thus supporting a gradual recovery in economic growth beginning in late 2012. In the United States, economic conditions have improved in recent months, with better-than-anticipated growth in real GDP in the second half of 2011 and some recovery in consumer confidence. Nonetheless, growth in US economic activity is expected to be relatively modest through 2013, owing to ongoing household deleveraging, fiscal consolidation and negative spillover effects from the European crisis. Growth in emerging-market economies has slowed, as expected, and is projected to moderate further toward a more sustainable - yet still robust - pace, in response to past tightening in domestic monetary policy and weaker global demand. Declines in commodity prices in the second half of last year and decreasing momentum in the global economy have begun to dampen inflation pressures.
 
Faced with subdued prospects for growth and diminishing inflation pressures, central banks in some advanced economies have provided additional monetary stimulus by lowering policy interest rates or engaging in further quantitative easing. They have also adopted additional measures to provide liquidity support to the financial system. Central banks in a number of emerging-market economies have also begun to loosen monetary policy, reversing earlier policy tightening.
 
Conditions in global financial markets have tightened in recent months as the sovereign debt crisis in the euro area has deepened and banking sector stress has remained elevated. Tensions in euro-area government debt markets have escalated since the October Report. Bond spreads in some of the region's largest economies have risen, and yields for most of the peripheral sovereigns have reached post-euro record highs. In contrast, yields on government bonds in the United States, Germany and a number of other developed economies have continued to fall as investors shift toward safer and more-liquid assets.
 
Conditions in global short-term bank funding markets have generally deteriorated because of developments in Europe. In particular, most European banks have been shut out of unsecured term-funding markets in light of their significant exposure to euro-area sovereign debt, large recapitalization needs and major funding requirements. As a result, the European Central Bank has provided increased liquidity to the European banking system against an expanded range of eligible collateral for periods of up to three years. European banks have also experienced severe difficulty accessing US-dollar funds to finance their foreign-denominated assets. To alleviate these funding pressures, existing arrangements for temporary US-dollar liquidity swaps between the US Federal Reserve and five major central banks have been extended, and the rate on these arrangements has been reduced.  As a contingency measure, these central banks have also agreed to establish a network of temporary bilateral liquidity swap arrangements so that liquidity can be provided in each jurisdiction, in any of their currencies, should market conditions warrant.
 
Rising investor anxiety has also affected other asset classes, albeit to a lesser extent. Issuance of US corporate debt has rebounded since the October Report, although credit spreads have remained at wider levels than in the first half of 2011. Global equity indexes are generally unchanged since late October but have shown considerable volatility, while European financial sub-indexes have declined significantly.
 
The deterioration in financial conditions is projected to persist for some time and to be increasingly transmitted to households and businesses through tighter borrowing conditions. Financial conditions are expected to improve in 2013, supported by a rebound in global economic activity.
 
Recent economic indicators suggest that the euro area entered a recession in the fourth quarter of 2011. Purchasing managers indexes have fallen below the threshold that divides growth from contraction, and confidence indicators have declined to levels typically seen during recessions. Unemployment rates have started to rise (particularly in the periphery) from already-elevated levels. Worsening economic conditions and increased borrowing costs have further weakened public finances and heightened concerns about bank balance sheets, even though a number of countries, including France, Italy and Spain, have adopted additional fiscal austerity and structural reform measures. Faced with higher funding costs, European banks are restricting access to credit and charging higher interest rates on loans to businesses and households. The adverse feedback loop between economic weakness, sovereign debt vulnerabilities and financial sector strains has thus become more entrenched. Growing excess supply and declines in commodity prices are expected to dampen inflation pressures throughout most of the region.
 
In addition to measures aimed at supporting the financial system, the ECB has reduced its policy interest rate by 50 basis points, given the recent deterioration in economic activity. In an effort to restore financial stability and confidence, European policy-makers have announced a number of initiatives, including increased private sector debt relief for Greece, a higher requirement for core Tier 1 capital ratios for banks, an earlier starting date for the European Stability Mechanism and a new Fiscal Compact to enhance fiscal discipline.
 
Economic prospects in the euro area have diminished further since the October Report and continue to be subject to a high degree of uncertainty. The Bank's base-case projection assumes that European authorities will implement sufficient measures to contain the crisis, although this assumption is clearly subject to downside risks. The ongoing recession is expected to last four quarters, resulting in a peak-to-trough decline in economic activity of close to 1.5 per cent. Deteriorating financial conditions, bank deleveraging, fiscal consolidation and large negative confidence effects are expected to lead to a contraction in domestic demand in 2012, and growth in exports is projected to slow notably, owing to weaker global demand. Economic outcomes are expected to vary widely across countries, however, with subdued growth in the core economies and a significant contraction in the periphery. A modest recovery is expected to begin in the euro area in late 2012 as financing conditions begin to improve and confidence gradually recovers in response to the implementation of required policy measures and structural reforms. Overall, relative to expectations in the October Report, the level of real GDP in the euro area is projected to be about 1 per cent lower at the end of 2013.
 
Recent economic activity in the United States has been stronger than anticipated. Boosted by higher consumer spending and business investment, growth in real GDP rebounded to approximately 2.5 per cent in the second half of 2011. Despite this positive surprise, the US recovery is expected to proceed at a more modest pace through 2012-13, with GDP growth averaging roughly 2 per cent per year, owing to headwinds from household deleveraging, fiscal consolidation and spillover effects from the European crisis.
 
US inflation pressures are projected to decrease in response to lower commodity prices and significant excess capacity. As a result, the Federal Reserve is expected to maintain very accommodative monetary conditions. Average annual GDP growth in the United States is projected to be slightly stronger in 2012 than anticipated in the October Report, mainly reflecting the rebound in growth in the second half of 2011 and reduced fiscal tightening. Growth in 2013 is, however, expected to be significantly weaker.
 
Fiscal consolidation is projected to exert a drag on US real GDP growth amounting to about 0.8 percentage points in 2012 and about 2.5 percentage points in 2013. The estimated impact in 2012 is smaller than was anticipated in the October Report, given improved prospects for the extension of the payroll tax cuts and unemployment insurance benefits that were scheduled to expire at the end of 2011. The estimated drag in 2013 is larger, however, reflecting the impact of spending cuts that are assumed to take place during 2013.
 
Consumption growth has been supported in recent months by declines in commodity prices from the peaks observed a year ago, as well as by an improvement in consumer confidence and the increased availability of motor vehicles at US dealerships following the restoration of Japanese supply chains. Growth in personal disposable income has remained weak, however, and the savings rate has fallen below the 5 per cent to 6 per cent range that the Bank expects will be needed to rebuild household balance sheets over the medium term. US consumption is therefore expected to grow more modestly through 2013, as households renew efforts to repair their balance sheets in an environment of slowly improving labour market conditions and a persistent drag on incomes due to fiscal consolidation. In addition, US banks are projected to tighten lending standards for consumers and businesses in reaction to increased funding costs related to the European crisis.
 
Restricted access to mortgage credit, together with an elevated inventory of foreclosed properties, is expected to keep the construction of new homes at a low level during most of 2012. Tighter financial conditions and high vacancy rates should also limit growth in the construction of non-residential structures over this period. A modest recovery is projected in both residential and non-residential construction toward the end of 2012, when financial conditions are expected to improve.
 
Exports and business investment in equipment and software are expected to continue to be important drivers of US economic growth over the projection horizon, although their contribution is projected to decrease somewhat in 2012. Indeed, despite support from healthy corporate balance sheets, growth in business investment is expected to be constrained during the year by uncertainty over prospects for future growth, tightening financial conditions and low rates of resource utilization. The pace of expansion in business investment is projected to improve in 2013 once these effects begin to dissipate.
 
Growth in exports is expected to slow in 2012, owing to weaker growth in global demand as well as the recent appreciation of the US dollar, which partly reflected international investor demand for the safety and liquidity of US Treasury securities. Exports are projected to recover somewhat in 2013, however, in response to a gradual strengthening in external demand.
 
In Japan, activity related to reconstruction helped boost the growth of real GDP to 5.6 per cent in the third quarter of 2011. Real GDP growth moderated sharply in the fourth quarter of last year, however, and is projected to average less than 2.0 per cent per year through 2013 as the impetus from the rebuilding of infrastructure wanes. At the same time, slowing external demand and the recent sharp appreciation of the yen are expected to weigh on export growth. In reaction to the deceleration in economic activity, the Bank of Japan has further expanded the size of its asset-purchase program. The central bank also intervened in foreign exchange markets at the end of October to limit the rise of the yen.
 
Real GDP growth in other advanced economies has slowed recently and is expected to be subdued in coming quarters, reflecting a weakening in external demand, declining household and business confidence, and continued drag from fiscal consolidation. To counter the deterioration in economic conditions, monetary authorities in a number of countries, including Australia, Norway and Sweden, have lowered their policy interest rates. Some economies with significant trade and financial links with the euro area could experience a recession. Economic activity is expected to gather momentum toward the end of 2012, supported by a modest recovery in global growth and an improvement in confidence.
 
Economic growth in China decelerated to 9.1 per cent in the third quarter of 2011 in response to the past tightening in monetary policy and slowing external demand, especially from Europe, its most important trading partner. Measures undertaken by the authorities to cool activity in the real estate sector have led to a softening in housing demand and a fall in property prices. Moderating food prices contributed to a marked decline in the overall inflation rate to 4.1 per cent in December from a recent peak of 6.5 per cent in July. With inflation pressures easing, Chinese authorities have shifted toward a more accommodative monetary policy stance and in December lowered the reserve requirement ratio for financial institutions by 50 basis points. Growth in real GDP is nevertheless projected to moderate to around 8 per cent over 2012-13. Structural reforms and a modest appreciation of the Chinese real exchange rate are expected to support a gradual rotation of demand away from investment and exports and toward consumption.
 
Despite some slowing due to a moderation in global demand, real GDP growth in other emerging-market economies is expected to remain relatively strong, supported by an easing in monetary policy. This generally positive outlook is tempered, however, by the effects of increased risk aversion in global financial markets, which has led to capital outflows from some emerging-market economies, implying some tightening in credit conditions. Growth is projected to slow particularly rapidly in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe, since their exports are directed principally toward Europe and their financial systems are heavily dominated by Western European banks.
 
Prices for non-energy commodities are essentially unchanged since the October Report. While the prices of base metals and agricultural commodities have recovered somewhat in recent weeks following declines in late 2011, the prices of non-energy commodities are projected to fall in 2012 in reaction to diminished prospects for global economic growth, before partially recovering in 2013 when global demand conditions begin to improve. This profile is lower over the projection horizon than had been anticipated in October.
 
Prices for energy commodities have been mixed in recent months. Prices for West Texas Intermediate crude oil have rebounded to roughly US$100 per barrel, reflecting low global inventories and geopolitical tensions.
 
In addition, improved prospects for alleviating the inventory overhang in Cushing have led to a narrowing in the WTI-Brent spread to around US$10 per barrel from US$24 per barrel in October. The latest futures curve suggests that WTI crude prices are projected to ease modestly through the end of 2013, although prices are expected to remain above the levels anticipated at the time of the October Report. In contrast, natural gas prices in North America have fallen sharply in response to unseasonably warm weather, in an environment of persistent excess supply. While prices are projected to recover through 2013 based on the latest futures curve, the level of natural gas prices is expected to remain lower through 2013 than anticipated in the October Report.
 
Despite the relatively subdued outlook for global economic growth, external demand for Canada's exports, as indicated by the foreign activity measure, is projected to grow moderately in 2012 and to pick up further in 2013 in response to an improvement in US residential construction and a rebound in the growth in US business investment. Deteriorating economic conditions in Europe have a relatively modest impact on the foreign activity measure, given Canada's limited direct trade links with Europe, and will affect Canadian exports primarily through their spillover effects on US private domestic demand. Nonetheless, the crisis in Europe is expected to have an indirect impact on the Canadian economy through its implications for financial conditions, confidence and global commodity prices.
 
The Bank of Canada's commodity price index has declined since the October Report, owing mainly to the impact of lower natural gas prices, which has more than offset the effect of the higher price of WTI oil. Over the projection horizon, the BCPI is projected to increase as natural gas prices rise, despite expected declines in the prices of non-energy commodities and crude oil, but to remain somewhat below the levels anticipated in the October Report.
 
The Canadian dollar has averaged close to 98 cents US since the December fixed announcement date and is assumed to remain at this level over the projection horizon. This is very close to the 99 cents US level assumed in the October Report.
 
The Bank's outlook for the Canadian economy is little changed relative to the October Report. Although growth in the second half of 2011 was stronger than anticipated, the weaker external outlook is expected to affect the Canadian economy through confidence, financial and trade channels. The Bank continues to expect that these headwinds will limit economic growth in Canada in 2012 to a modest pace, after which growth is projected to pick up as the global environment improves. Private domestic demand is anticipated to remain the primary driver of growth in Canada throughout the projection horizon, with relatively weak global economic growth and competitiveness challenges, including the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar, continuing to restrain net exports. Consistent with this outlook, the Bank continues to expect that the output gap will persist well into 2013. Excess supply in the economy, together with moderate growth in labour compensation and dissipating pressures from commodity prices, is anticipated to result in a moderation in both total and core CPI inflation to below 2 per cent around mid-2012. This moderation is projected to be slightly less pronounced than in the October Report, partly reflecting some expected persistence in the slightly firmer prices seen recently for a few goods, as well as a slightly higher assumed path for oil prices. Nonetheless, the broad profile for inflation in Canada is little changed, with the Bank projecting both total and core inflation to return gradually to 2 per cent over the latter part of the projection horizon as slack in the economy is slowly absorbed and inflation expectations remain well anchored.
 
Despite the deterioration in global financial conditions, the aggregate supply and price of credit to businesses and households in Canada remain very stimulative, providing important ongoing support to the economic expansion. Both the Bank's Senior Loan Officer Survey and the Business Outlook Survey suggested that business-lending conditions were little changed in the fourth quarter, after several quarters of sustained easing. Household credit remains readily available at very low rates.
 
Canadian financial markets have been resilient in recent months. The S&P/TSX Composite Index is roughly unchanged since the October Report, as are the relative prices of Canadian bank equities. Canadian corporate spreads have narrowed marginally and issuance has been reasonably healthy, while government bond yields have declined sharply, with the 10-year nominal yield falling below 2 per cent for the first time. This is partly due to sustained international demand for the debt of Canadian governments, banks and corporations, a sign that their credit quality is perceived to be high by global standards.
 
In this context, Canadian banks remain well positioned to lend, with ready access to relatively low-cost funding across the term structure. This strong position has facilitated further declines in residential mortgage rates in recent weeks, potentially adding to the recent momentum in the growth of household credit, which picked up through the autumn as resale housing market activity strengthened. In contrast, the growth of business credit slowed in recent months despite the persistence of historically low borrowing costs, consistent with a slowing in the growth of business investment amid heightened economic and financial uncertainty.
 
Growth in the narrow monetary aggregates continued to rebound in the fourth quarter, reflecting some increase in liquidity preference, with heightened uncertainty and low alternative rates of return likely playing a role. Growth in the broad monetary aggregates has also picked up, albeit to a lesser extent, remaining consistent with relatively subdued inflation pressures ahead.
 
The level of real GDP in the fourth quarter of 2011 was 0.6 percentage points higher than the Bank had projected in the October Report. Real GDP grew by 3.5 per cent in the third quarter of 2011 and is estimated to have risen by 2.0 per cent in the fourth quarter, above expectations in the October Report. These stronger results reflect a larger rebound from the temporary factors that had restrained growth earlier in the year, as well as greater momentum in household expenditures in Canada and stronger-than-anticipated activity in the United States. The resulting higher level of activity in Canada implies less slack in the economy than previously expected. The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap has shown similar dynamics, narrowing to -0.7 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2011. The Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey also showed that the proportion of firms that would have difficulty responding to an unexpected increase in demand edged up relative to the previous survey, remaining at a level close to its historical average.
 
In contrast, conditions in the labour market have softened in recent months. The unemployment rate rose through the fourth quarter to reach 7.5 per cent in December, reflecting a decline in private sector employment, and average weekly hours worked have fallen. While responses to the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey showed an increase in the proportion of firms reporting labour shortages, this proportion remains below its historical average.
 
On balance, the Bank judges that the economy was operating at roughly three-quarters of a per cent below its production capacity in the fourth quarter of 2011, a smaller degree of slack than the Bank had anticipated in the October Report.
 
The Bank expects modest growth in the Canadian economy in the first half of 2012, after which growth is projected to improve. As in the October Report, this projection assumes that the crisis in Europe will be contained, eventually leading to reduced uncertainty and a gradual return of confidence. On an average annual basis, growth in real GDP is projected to moderate from 2.4 per cent in 2011 to 2.0 per cent in 2012, before picking up temporarily above the rate of the economy's production potential to 2.8 per cent in 2013. Private domestic demand, supported by accommodative domestic financial conditions, is expected to account for almost all of Canada's economic growth over the projection horizon.
 
This outlook for the Canadian economy is little changed from the October Report. While the economy had more momentum in the second half of 2011 than anticipated, the projected pace of growth through 2012 is more modest than previously envisaged. The weaker quarterly profile through 2012 reflects more persistent uncertainty about the global economic and financial outlook, which dampens private domestic demand through confidence and financial channels, and weaker projected growth in foreign activity, which depresses Canadian exports.
 
Household expenditures - the combination of consumer spending and residential investment - are now projected to grow at a steady pace through 2013, which is a stronger outlook than in the October Report. The Bank continues to expect that consumption will grow at a rate slightly below the projected moderate growth in personal disposable income, resulting in a modest rise in the savings rate. Residential investment is, however, now expected to remain strong, owing to its greater-than-anticipated momentum in the second half of last year and favourable mortgage financing conditions.
 
Confidence effects stemming from the weaker and more uncertain global outlook are projected to exert only a modest dampening effect on Canadian household spending. Reflecting the upwardly revised profile for residential investment, household expenditures are now expected to remain high relative to GDP over the projection horizon and the ratio of household debt to income is projected to rise further.
 
The underlying pace of growth in business fixed investment has moderated in recent quarters from the robust rate seen through 2010 and early 2011, consistent with the adverse impact of heightened uncertainty on business confidence. While this headwind is expected to persist in coming quarters, other fundamentals supporting business investment in Canada remain extremely favourable, particularly very stimulative financial conditions, solid Canadian corporate balance sheets, heightened competitive pressures and relatively high commodity prices. Moreover, significant scope remains to make up for the unusually sharp decline in investment experienced during the recession. As a result, the Bank expects relatively solid growth in business fixed investment through 2012, with some further strengthening in 2013 as confidence recovers. This projection is consistent with the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey, which showed that investment intentions remain strongly positive despite indications from a number of firms that ongoing financial market volatility and global economic uncertainty had affected their investment plans.
 
The contribution of government spending to real GDP growth is assumed to be very modest over the projection horizon, in line with fiscal plans of federal and provincial governments to consolidate spending.
 
Foreign activity has been stronger in recent months than the Bank had previously expected, particularly in the United States, contributing to a more favourable outcome for Canadian exports. Going forward, however, foreign activity is projected to grow slightly more slowly than anticipated in the October Report. In addition, competitiveness remains a challenge for Canadian firms. Unit labour costs in Canada have continued to increase relative to those in the United States over the past year, resulting in a cumulative gap of almost 40 per cent between the beginning of 2005 and the third quarter of 2011. While the appreciation of the Canadian dollar accounts for most of this deterioration in competitiveness, about one-quarter of it is due to the productivity underperformance of Canadian firms. Reflecting these competitiveness challenges and the moderate projected growth in foreign activity, the Bank expects relatively modest growth in Canadian exports through 2013. With imports anticipated to grow at nearly the same pace, net exports contribute little to real GDP growth in Canada over the projection horizon, and the current account deficit remains significant at around 3 per cent of GDP.
 
Overall real GDP in Canada is projected to grow at a pace close to the estimated growth rate of potential output in 2012, leaving the current degree of economic slack to persist in coming quarters.  With the pace of real GDP growth subsequently picking up to a rate somewhat above potential, the economy is anticipated to return gradually to full capacity by the third quarter of 2013, one quarter earlier than expected in the October Report. In this regard, the Canadian economy is projected to operate with slightly less slack throughout the projection horizon than indicated in the October base-case scenario, reflecting the slightly higher level of economic activity seen recently.
 
Core CPI inflation was 2.1 per cent in October and November, up from 1.9 per cent in the third quarter and 1.5 per cent in the first half of 2011. As anticipated, this increase partly reflected the dissipation of the effect of the HST on year-over-year core inflation, as well as the lagged effects of higher world prices for agricultural products on the prices of food and clothing. Despite higher core inflation, total CPI inflation has come down from its peak of 3.4 per cent in the second quarter of 2011, as anticipated, reflecting some moderation in gasoline prices together with the unwinding of the direct effects on year-over-year inflation of the introduction of the HST in the third quarter of 2010.
 
Inflation expectations have remained well anchored. The January Consensus Economics forecast for total CPI inflation in 2012 and 2013 was 2.0 per cent. As reported in the Bank's winter Business Outlook Survey, 92 per cent of firms expect average inflation over the next two years to remain within the 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range. Market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations also remain consistent with the 2 per cent inflation-control target.
 
Core inflation is projected to moderate through 2012 to a level somewhat below 2 per cent, as excess supply persists and the effects of higher prices for food and clothing on year-over-year inflation unwind. Total CPI inflation is projected to continue to decline to around 1.5 per cent by mid-2012, reflecting lower core inflation as well as the gradual impact on gasoline prices of the decline in world oil prices from their peak in the second quarter of 2011. Both total and core inflation are expected to start to rise gradually by the end of 2012, reaching 2 per cent by the third quarter of 2013 as excess supply in the economy is slowly absorbed, the growth of labour compensation increases modestly and inflation expectations remain well anchored.
 
These inflation dynamics are similar to those anticipated in the October Report, although the overall inflation profile is marginally firmer in this projection, partly reflecting some expected persistence in the slightly higher-than-anticipated prices observed recently for motor vehicles and electricity. These upside surprises have resulted in slightly higher-than-expected core inflation in recent months, the persistence of which is consistent with an economy estimated to be operating with somewhat less economic slack since mid-2011 than previously anticipated. A slightly higher profile for oil prices than previously assumed is also incorporated, as is the estimated impact of the increase in the Quebec Sales Tax.
 
This projection includes a gradual reduction in monetary stimulus over the projection horizon, consistent with achieving the inflation target.
 
The uncertainty surrounding the Bank's inflation projection is illustrated using fan charts. Chart 33 and Chart 34 depict the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the first quarter of 2012 to the end of 2013.
 
The inflation outlook in Canada is subject to significant risks. In particular, the Bank's projection assumes that authorities in Europe are able to contain the ongoing crisis, although this assumption is clearly subject to downside risks.
 
The three main upside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the possibility of stronger-than-expected inflationary pressures in the global economy, stronger-than-expected growth in the US economy and stronger momentum in Canadian household spending.
 
Global inflationary pressures could be more persistent than currently projected if growth in emerging-market economies does not decelerate to more sustainable levels or if potential output in advanced economies is lower than projected.
 
Recently observed strength in US consumption could be more persistent than anticipated and fiscal policy could exert a smaller-than-anticipated drag on growth in the latter part of the projection.
 
Residential investment in Canada has been stronger than expected and household expenditures could have more momentum than currently projected.
 
The two main downside risks to inflation in Canada relate to sovereign debt and banking concerns in Europe and the possibility that growth in Canadian household spending could be weaker than projected.
 
Failure to contain the crisis in Europe is the most serious risk facing the global and Canadian economies. The effects on Canada through financial, confidence and trade channels would be substantial, given the size and importance of the euro area to the global economy.
 
High household debt levels in Canada could lead to a sharper-than-expected deceleration in household spending. Relatedly, if there were a sudden weakening in the Canadian housing sector, it could have sizable spillover effects on other areas of the economy.
 
Overall, the Bank judges that the risks to the inflation outlook in Canada are roughly balanced over the projection horizon.