Growth in the Canadian economy has been essentially in line with the expectations set out in the Bank's January Monetary Policy Report Update. But inflation has been higher than expected because pressures on capacity over the past year have been stronger than previously judged, and the prices of food and gasoline have recently risen more than expected. After considering the full range of indicators, the Bank now judges that the Canadian economy was operating just above its production capacity in the first quarter of this year.
 
Robust domestic demand continues to support Canada's economic growth, and there has also been stronger-than-expected growth outside North America, which has led to rising demand for, and prices of, many commodities. However, the slowing US economy has had a moderating effect on economic growth in Canada.
 
Over the projection horizon, domestic demand should remain robust, although not as strong as in recent years. With the US slowdown now expected to be somewhat more prolonged than previously projected, net exports should exert a slightly greater drag on growth in 2007. All told, the Canadian economy is expected to expand at a rate slower than potential through 2007, and in line with potential through 2008 and 2009.
 
With the excess demand in the economy expected to disappear in the second half of this year, and with pressures on housing prices expected to continue to ease, core inflation is projected to decline to 2 per cent by the end of 2007 and remain there through the projection period. If energy prices evolve in line with those currently reflected in futures markets, total inflation should average just below 2 per cent in the second quarter of 2007 before moving above the 2 per cent target and peaking below 3 per cent near the end of 2007. Total inflation should then return to target by mid-2008.
 
The upside risk to the Bank's inflation projection is that the recent strength of inflation could be more persistent than projected. Pressures on capacity could be greater and more prolonged than currently judged. The strong growth in household credit and broad money continues to point to this upside risk. As well, the downward pressure on inflation from the prices of imported goods could diminish more quickly than expected, and global food and energy prices could put more upward pressure on inflation.
 
The downside risk to inflation continues to come from the possibility of a slowdown in the US economy that is more pronounced than that already incorporated in the Bank's base-case projection.
 
The Bank continues to judge that the risks to its inflation projection are roughly balanced, although there is now a slight tilt to the upside.
 
The Bank left its key policy interest rate unchanged at 4.25 per cent on 6 March and 24 April. The current level of the target for the overnight rate is judged, at this time, to be consistent with achieving the inflation target over the medium term.
 
The year-over-year rate of increase in the total CPI has been higher than projected in the January Update, having risen from 1.3 per cent in the last quarter of 2006 to 1.9 per cent in the first quarter of 2007. If the effect of changes in indirect taxes is excluded, the rate of increase in the total CPI in the first quarter of 2007 was 2.4 per cent. The core rate of inflation increased to 2.3 per cent over the same period, also slightly higher than expected.
 
The core rate of inflation has been moving up since the spring of 2006. Capacity pressures stemming from strong domestic demand have contributed to an increase in inflationary pressures, especially on the prices of components such as shelter services and, to a lesser extent, of services other than shelter. As well, the downward pressure on the core rate coming from reduced prices for many import-intensive goods (such as clothing and durable goods other than automobiles) has lessened somewhat.
 
In the first quarter of 2007, the year-over-year rate of increase in housing prices eased slightly more than anticipated at the time of the January Update. However, this was more than offset by higher-than-expected increases in the prices of several other components of the core rate of inflation. In particular, the recent surge in the prices of grains and oilseeds, stemming partly from the persistent rise in the demand for biofuels, has contributed to higher core food prices. Prices of imported clothing, durable goods excluding autos, and of core services other than housing have also come in higher than anticipated.
 
The higher-than-expected increase in total CPI inflation in the first quarter of 2007 reflected both the higher-than-projected core rate and increases in the prices of some of the more volatile components. Fruit and vegetable prices rose unexpectedly as a result of weather-related reductions in North American supplies. Gasoline prices were higher than projected, partly owing to temporary production disruptions at oil refineries, although the impact of higher prices for crude oil also played a role.
 
Other measures of the trend rate of inflation that the Bank follows have also moved up above 2 per cent when the effect of changes in indirect taxes is excluded.
 
Key medium - and longer-term measures of inflation expectations continue to be close to 2 per cent. In the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey, 88 per cent of firms expected CPI inflation to be within a range of 1 to 3 per cent, on average, over the next two years. Consistent with the temporary reduction in CPI inflation stemming from the cut in the GST, the average private sector forecast for total CPI inflation in 2007 was slightly below 2 per cent, while consensus forecasts of inflation over the longer term continued to be very close to 2 per cent.
 
Real GDP growth in Canada slowed modestly in the second half of 2006, increasing by 2.0 per cent in the third quarter and by 1.4 per cent in the fourth quarter. The outcome for the fourth quarter was very close to the 1.5 per cent projected in the January Update, with a decrease in inventory investment exerting a significant drag on growth. The inventory correction appears to have been largely completed by the end of 2006. Currently available information suggests that real GDP grew by about 2.5 per cent in the first quarter of 2007, close to the 2.4 per cent rate projected in the last Update.
 
Although the growth of final domestic demand has slowed since the middle of 2006 from the very strong pace registered in the first half, it remained the chief driver of GDP growth. Further substantial increases in capital spending by businesses reflected relatively high overall profitability, earlier reductions in the prices of imported machinery and equipment, and continued favourable financing conditions. With solid employment growth, real personal disposable income continued to rise, as did household net worth and household credit, contributing to ongoing strength in consumer spending. In contrast, the growth of government spending on goods and services lessened appreciably. Residential construction decreased as expected.
 
The US economic slowdown has continued to affect Canada's economic growth. In particular, the weak level of motor vehicle sales in the United States contributed to significant production cuts in the Canadian auto industry. Consequently, inventory investment in motor-vehicle-related industries in Canada decreased sharply, especially in the fourth quarter of the year. As well, further large declines in residential investment in the United States resulted in reductions in Canadian exports of lumber and, to a lesser extent, other building materials.
 
Nevertheless, Canada's total exports recovered in the second half of 2006. Exports of machinery and equipment, metals and minerals, and agricultural and fish products all rose strongly after mid-2006. At the same time, after another strong gain in the third quarter of 2006, imports eased towards year-end and into this year, partly as a result of the reduced inventory investment by Canadian businesses.
 
In recent years, most of the growth in output has come from increases in labour input (as indicated by hours worked), rather than from gains in labour productivity. For the 2004-06 period, annual growth in hours worked in the business sector averaged about 1.8 per cent, which was well above expectations. Most of this growth came from the expansion of the working-age population. In the fourth quarter of 2006, hours worked continued to increase solidly, with year-over-year growth of 1.8 per cent.
 
Annual growth in labour productivity in the business sector averaged about 1.2 per cent for the 2004-06 period, down from 2.3 per cent over the 1996-2000 period. One factor contributing to the slowdown in productivity growth could be the large amount of structural adjustment under way in the Canadian economy in the face of rising global competition and stronger demand for commodities, which has pushed up commodity prices and the trade-weighted value of the Canadian dollar. In particular, labour and capital have been moving towards commodity production and the non-tradable goods and services sectors. It is reasonable to expect that labour and capital could be somewhat less productive during the transition period. Also, higher commodity prices encourage the production of resources that are more difficult and costly to extract, dampening productivity in those sectors.
 
Productivity growth was particularly slow in the second half of 2006, with measured productivity in the fourth quarter up only 0.4 per cent from a year earlier. In addition to the factors noted above, some of this weakness would also appear to be cyclical in nature, reflecting the inventory correction and more general weakness in the manufacturing sector. As well, productivity in the services sector continues to be below expectations. All told, especially given the recent strength in investment, the extent of the weakness in overall productivity remains somewhat puzzling.
 
The Bank estimates potential output over history by breaking out movements in labour supply and labour productivity into their trend and cyclical components. Using its conventional measure, the Bank currently estimates that average growth in potential output over the 2004-06 period was 2.6 per cent. This is somewhat lower than the 2.8 per cent to 3 per cent that had been assumed in projections of potential output growth over that period. This slower pace of growth in potential output over the past several years largely reflects the weakness in the growth of actual labour productivity, which has more than offset higher-than-expected growth in labour input.
 
Several indicators of capacity pressures continue to suggest that the economy has been operating in slight excess demand. In the spring Business Outlook Survey from the Bank's regional offices, the percentage of firms reporting that they would have difficulty in meeting an unanticipated increase in demand remained above average. The employment-to-population ratio in March 2007 was at its highest level in 31 years, and the unemployment rate in both February and March was at a 31-year low. The Bank's conventional measure of the output gap, which is subject to a substantial degree of uncertainty, indicates that the economy was operating about 0.2 per cent above its production potential in the first quarter of 2007, slightly higher than was expected in the January Update.
 
The fact that the core rate of inflation has averaged slightly above 2 per cent since September 2006 is also consistent with an economy operating slightly above its production capacity.
 
In contrast, other indicators suggest that the economy may be either in balance or even in slight excess supply. The percentage of firms reporting labour shortages in the Bank's spring survey, while up slightly from the previous survey, was still only about average on a historical basis. Statistics Canada's measure of capacity utilization in the non-farm, goods-producing sector suggested below-average pressure on production capacity by the fourth quarter of 2006.
 
The underlying trend increase in aggregate wages (based on the 12-month change in average hourly earnings of permanent workers reported by Statistics Canada in the Labour Force Survey) has fallen to between 2.25 per cent and 3 per cent since the third quarter of 2006. The year-to-year rise in another wage indicator - hourly labour compensation from Statistics Canada's Productivity Accounts - decreased to just over 3 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2006.
 
Given the very low gains in productivity, unit labour costs in the fourth quarter of 2006 were up 2.7 per cent from their level a year earlier. With recent compensation increases ranging between 2.25 per cent and 3 per cent and with trend productivity growth estimated at about 1 per cent in 2006, underlying increases in unit labour costs seem to have been lower, at just under 2 per cent.
 
After reviewing all the indicators of capacity pressures, it is the Governing Council's judgment that, overall, the economy was operating just above its production capacity in the first quarter of 2007.
 
Canada's terms of trade decreased further in the second half of 2006, owing to somewhat lower prices for energy commodities after the middle of the year. Consequently, the four-quarter change in the chain price index for GDP (a broad price measure of the goods and services produced in Canada) eased from 3.0 per cent in the second quarter of 2006 to 0.5 per cent in the fourth quarter. This contributed to further moderation in the annual increase in nominal GDP, which rose by only 2.8 per cent in the year ending in the fourth quarter of 2006.
 
Growth in global demand for commodities continues to be underpinned by the strong global economy, particularly in the emerging-market economies led by China and India. Combined with delays in several major projects intended to expand supplies, this has led to further increases in the world prices of many non-energy commodities since the January Update.
 
The price of light crude oil (West Texas Intermediate), which was about US$53 per barrel at the time of the January Update, averaged US$63 in the ten days ending on 20 April 2007. This increase was chiefly caused by strengthening North American demand with the return of normal winter weather conditions, as well as by somewhat greater geopolitical uncertainties. Natural gas prices are also up a little relative to January.
 
This recent improvement in most commodity prices should lead to a recovery in Canada's terms of trade in early 2007 and, thus, to somewhat stronger growth in nominal GDP. This strengthened rate of nominal income growth should, in turn, help to increase the growth of corporate profits and government tax revenues in the near term.
 
The global economy continues to be characterized by high levels of desired savings relative to desired investment. This has contributed to a financial environment that exhibits low levels of long-term interest rates and strong investor appetite for risk, reflected in the low level of risky spreads. Moreover, equity markets and debt issuance around the world have been buoyant. In February and March, volatility and risk premiums rose in many markets from historically low levels, but have since largely returned to those low levels. The main exception is the US sub-prime mortgage market, where some difficulties persist and further deterioration is possible.
 
Policy rates in both Canada and the United States have remained unchanged since the middle of 2006. Short-term interest rates in the United States reflect expectations of a modest decline in the federal funds rate in the second half of 2007. In Canada, market expectations derived from short-term interest rates imply no change in the policy rate in 2007.
 
Responding to the sustained strength of their economies, several central banks, including the Bank of England, the European Central Bank, and the Bank of Japan, have continued to raise their policy rates since the beginning of the year. Financial markets expect a further tightening of monetary policy in these countries over the remainder of 2007 and into early 2008.
 
Through the first quarter of 2007, the Canadian dollar traded in the range of about 84.5 to 87.5 cents US assumed in the projection presented in the January Update. However, since early April, the Canadian dollar has moved above this range as a result of several developments, including the rise in commodity prices and relatively stronger economic data in Canada than in the United States.
 
Corporate profitability in Canada remains robust. Balance sheets in the Canadian non-financial business sector continue to improve, buoyed by rising profit margins. Profits have also been very strong in the financial sector since the October Report.
 
Against this backdrop, credit conditions for businesses remain accommodative. Despite high corporate profits, which have dampened the demand for credit, business borrowing since the January Update has expanded at a rate close to its historical average, partly reflecting increased demand for short-term financing related to mergers and acquisitions, as well as robust capital spending. The healthy outlook for the global economy should help to sustain the strong profitability of Canadian businesses. To the extent that credit spreads remain low, firms should continue to have ready access to funding for investment.
 
Household credit continues to expand at a rate well above its historical average. This has been partly due to borrowing against home equity. Rising house prices have improved the net worth of households and have facilitated cheaper access to borrowed funds. Total new borrowing against home equity has tripled in volume since 2001 and has contributed to the strength of household spending over this period. Since the January Update, the growth in housing prices has moderated somewhat, but past increases have allowed household borrowing to remain robust.
 
Despite higher indebtedness, households remain in sound financial health, with a relatively low debt-service ratio for the sector as a whole and only a small proportion of financially vulnerable households. Healthy household balance sheets, together with favourable employment conditions and ready access to borrowed funds, suggest that robust credit growth should continue to support household spending.
 
Since January, the growth rate of the monetary aggregates has remained high. The growth of broad money (M2++) is consistent with a core rate of inflation slightly above 2 per cent at the end of 2007 and into early 2008. At the same time, the break-even inflation rate implicit in the spread between nominal and Real Return government bonds has moved up slightly. Liquidity and technical factors, however, make this spread difficult to interpret.
 
This section describes the Bank's outlook for the global and Canadian economies through to the end of 2009. The base-case projection has been developed assuming a slow and orderly resolution of global imbalances, predicated on further supportive policy actions to rebalance global demand and a gradual real effective depreciation of the US dollar. Energy prices are assumed to evolve in line with current futures prices, and the Canadian dollar is assumed to trade within the range of 86.5 to 89.5 cents US, evident since early April. With the projection horizon extended to 2009, demographic effects related to an aging workforce begin to modestly reduce the assumption for the growth of potential output, not only in Canada, but for many industrialized countries. The section concludes with a discussion of the risks to the base-case projection.
 
Since the January Update, global economic growth has been slightly stronger than expected, with slower growth in US real GDP more than offset by stronger-than-expected growth outside North America. As global capacity becomes fully absorbed and monetary policy tightens, this vigorous expansion is projected to moderate gradually from 5.3 per cent in 2006, to 4.8 per cent in 2007 and 2008, and to 4.6 per cent in 2009. This growth projection is slightly higher than that presented in the October Report and the January Update.
 
Growth in Japan and the major European economies is expected to remain solid over the projection period, with more growth coming from domestic consumption and investment demand, rather than from net exports. The outlook for growth in emerging-market countries over the same period also remains very strong, particularly for China and India.
 
The slowdown in the US economy in 2007 is expected to be more prolonged than projected in the January Update. As a result, US GDP growth is expected to slow to 2.1 per cent in 2007, before picking up to 2.8 per cent in 2008 and to 3.1 per cent in 2009. The downward revision in 2007 (from 2.5 per cent in the January Update to 2.1 per cent) largely reflects a more prolonged downturn in residential investment and weaker business investment. The growth rate of US potential output is now expected to slow from about 3 per cent over recent years to slightly below 3 per cent over the 2007-09 period.
 
With the slowing of US GDP growth to well below potential growth since the middle of 2006, some excess supply has started to emerge in the US economy. Thus, core inflation should gradually fall, although less quickly than previously expected. As inventory adjustments in the manufacturing sector are completed and the drag from weak residential and business investment dissipates, US GDP growth is expected to recover to close to potential growth by the end of 2007.
 
Over the projection horizon, growth in US household consumption is expected to moderate, as savings return to a more sustainable level. The depreciation of the US dollar in real effective terms since 2002, as well as a further expected depreciation of about 8 per cent over the projection horizon, should continue to stimulate US net exports. Strong foreign demand should further support US exports, contributing to a gradual reduction in the US current account deficit.
 
Futures prices for crude oil and natural gas over the projection period are higher than those in the January Update. They indicate that crude oil prices will move up from their current level of about US$63 per barrel to US$70 per barrel by early 2008 and then stay there for the remainder of next year and through 2009.
 
The price index for non-energy commodities is high and is expected to remain higher than projected in January, before declining gradually over the projection period. In particular, while strong global demand is boosting metals prices, these prices are expected to decrease slowly as increases in global capacity come online. Lumber prices are likely to ease over the remainder of this year, given the projected weakness of US housing activity. On the other hand, prices for grains and oilseeds are anticipated to remain strong for some time as a result of the surging demand for biofuels.
 
In Canada, final domestic demand is expected to continue to be the primary engine of growth over the projection period, growing at a robust, though more moderate, pace than in 2005 and 2006.
 
Consumer spending is expected to grow solidly over the projection period, reflecting further gains in real disposable income and increases in household net worth. Housing investment, after reaching a very high level last year, is projected to decline slightly in 2007 and 2008 and then to steady out in 2009.
 
Gains in business investment are expected to remain strong in 2007 and 2008, with growth averaging just over 5 per cent. Factors contributing to higher investment spending this year and next include near-term pressures on production capacity, expectations of relatively strong global economic growth and high levels for most commodity prices, ongoing supportive financial conditions, and generally strong profit levels with solid balance sheets. However, capital spending in the oil and gas industry is expected to ease somewhat in the near term, owing to a weaker outlook for gas drilling. In 2009, overall growth in investment is projected to ease as a result of the anticipated moderation in global economic growth and lower prices for non-energy commodities.
 
In the base-case projection, it is assumed that the government sector will run balanced budgets throughout the projection period, and that the real growth of government spending on goods and services will decelerate to average just under 3 per cent through 2009.
 
As growth in US domestic demand slows through mid-2007, Canadian exports are expected to ease slightly in the first half of 2007. But with the projected subsequent strengthening of US growth, Canada's exports should pick up over the remainder of the projection period. In contrast, further substantial increases in investment in machinery and equipment should contribute to continued strong growth in imports throughout 2007 and 2008. Hence, net exports are projected to exert a slightly greater drag on overall growth in 2007 than projected in the January Update, with this drag diminishing over the course of the year.
 
In the Bank's base-case projection, economic growth increases through 2007, with quarterly growth averaging just below 2 1/2 per cent in the first half of the year and just above 2 1/2 per cent in the second half. This implies average annual growth for 2007 of 2.2 per cent, slightly lower than in the January Update, largely reflecting the impact of the weaker US economic outlook on Canadian export growth. For 2008 and 2009, GDP growth is projected at 2.7 per cent.
 
In the base-case scenario for Canada, the assumption for potential output growth in both 2007 and 2008 remains unchanged at 2.8 per cent. For 2009, growth of the labour supply is assumed. to ease slightly by 0.1 per cent from 1.25 per cent in 2007 and 2008, implying potential growth of about 2.7 per cent. This 0.1 percentage point reduction in potential growth in 2009 reflects the Governing Council's judgment regarding the impact on the labour force of increased retirements as the first members of the baby-boom generation enter their early sixties.
 
With these growth profiles for GDP and potential growth, the economy would move back to its production capacity in the second half of 2007 and stay there for the remainder of the projection period. In this base-case projection, it is chiefly the recent slowdown and subsequent pickup of the US economy that bring aggregate supply and demand in Canada back into balance and keep them there.
 
The Bank's projection is that core inflation will remain above 2 per cent in the coming months, but return to 2 per cent by the end of 2007 and stay there for the rest of the projection period. With medium - and longer-term expectations of inflation well anchored, the inflation projection largely reflects the combined influence of the balance between aggregate demand and supply, and relative price developments. Excess demand through late 2006 and into 2007, combined with the projected momentum in core food prices, is expected to keep core inflation above 2 per cent in the near term. But two factors are expected to bring core inflation back to 2 per cent, despite a projected lessening of the downward pressure from import prices. First, the upward pressure coming from the economy operating slightly above its potential output is expected to dissipate, since excess demand is projected to be eliminated in the second half of 2007. Second, the significant contribution to inflation coming from housing price increases is expected to continue to decline.
 
The projected path for the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI reflects both the slightly higher projected track for core inflation in 2007 and expectations for energy prices, as well as changes in indirect taxes. Total CPI inflation is expected to be 1.9 per cent in the second quarter of 2007. With the direct effect of the GST cut ending in July 2007, upward-sloping futures curves for crude oil and natural gas prices and marked year-over-year increases in gasoline prices, total CPI inflation is projected to move up in the second half of 2007, peaking in the fourth quarter of 2007 at about 2.8 per cent. Thereafter, total CPI inflation is expected to decline, returning to the 2 per cent target by mid-2008 and staying there for the remainder of the projection period.
 
This inflation projection is consistent with an unchanged target for the overnight interest rate, largely because the impact of the current slowdown in US GDP growth on the Canadian economy is sufficient to bring total demand for goods and services in Canada back into line with supply.
 
There are both upside and downside risks to the Bank's base-case outlook for inflation.
 
The upside risk is that the recent strength in inflation could prove to be more persistent than is envisaged in the base-case projection. Pressures on capacity may be greater than judged and may be more persistent than projected. The observed strength in household credit growth and broad money growth in Canada continues to point to this upside risk. There is also a risk of greater international price pressures. The downward pressure on the core inflation rate from decreases in the prices of internationally traded manufactured goods could diminish more quickly than projected, especially if global growth continues to come in stronger than expected. Global food and energy prices could also boost inflation more than projected in the base case.
 
The downside risk to the outlook for Canadian growth and inflation continues to be that growth in the US economy could be lower than expected. This arises from the possibility of an even more pronounced slowdown in residential and business investment in the United States, which could spill over into weaker consumption growth. Weaker growth in domestic demand in the United States would further reduce demand for Canadian exports and would lower inflation relative to the base-case projection.
 
The Bank continues to judge that the risks to its inflation projection are roughly balanced, although there is now a slight tilt to the upside.
 
Finally, from a longer-term perspective, there remains a small probability of a disorderly resolution of global imbalances. While the improving balance in the global distribution of domestic demand will be helpful in supporting necessary adjustment, further policy actions are required internationally to facilitate an orderly resolution of global imbalances.