The global economy is expected to expand modestly in 2013, although its near-term dynamic has changed and the composition of growth is now slightly less favourable for Canada. The US economy is softer than expected but, as fiscal headwinds dissipate and household deleveraging ends, growth should accelerate through 2014 and 2015. The nascent recovery in Europe, while modest, has surprised on the upside. China's economy is showing renewed momentum, while growth in a number of other emerging-market economies has slowed as their financial conditions have tightened. Overall, the global economy is projected to grow by 2.8 per cent in 2013 and accelerate to 3.4 per cent in 2014 and 3.6 per cent in 2015.
 
Global financial conditions tightened from May through September in response to an anticipated slowing in the pace of asset purchases by the US Federal Reserve. The market reaction was stronger than expected. More recently, financial conditions have eased somewhat, following the decision in September by the Federal Reserve to maintain the pace of its asset purchases.
 
In advanced economies, yields on government bonds have risen from the lows reached in May, especially at longer maturities. A notable exception is Japan, where bond yields have declined somewhat, owing to the Bank of Japan's commitment to double the monetary base by the end of 2014 by purchasing Japanese government bonds to achieve its 2 per cent inflation target.
 
Despite the recent tightening, global financial conditions remain highly supportive-yields on most major government bonds are low by historical standards, and equity indexes are at multi-year high levels in several advanced economies. Yield spreads on most euro-area peripheral sovereign bonds have narrowed, reflecting signs of recovery in euro-area macroeconomic conditions and progress on reforms. Although spreads on US corporate bonds have widened modestly since May, issuance has remained solid.
 
The tightening of financial conditions in EMEs has been more pronounced than in advanced economies. The anticipation of US tapering and a reassessment of the growth prospects for some EMEs have led to capital outflows, a marked rise in bond yields and a decline in equity prices. However, there has been significant market differentiation among EMEs: those with weaker economic fundamentals, such as large fiscal and current account deficits, high inflation and declining growth prospects, have been the most affected.
 
US real GDP grew by slightly less than 2 per cent during the first half of 2013. Growth is projected to have remained modest in the second half of the year and below expectations in July.
 
This near-term softness has been broad-based. Consumer spending has been dampened by the increase in payroll taxes in January 2013 and a moderation in employment growth. Housing activity has also slowed, largely in response to the 95-basis-point rise in mortgage interest rates. In contrast, business investment has increased, but by less than expected, despite strong corporate balance sheets. Government spending continues to contract as the sequestration cuts are implemented.
 
The failure to reach a timely agreement to fund government operations resulted in a partial government shutdown in the first half of October. The shutdown will dampen economic growth in the fourth quarter, through the direct effect of furloughed government workers, and, more broadly, through negative effects on confidence. In addition, the debt-ceiling debate has exacerbated the adverse impact on confidence and economic activity.
 
The projection for US real GDP growth in the second half of 2013 is significantly lower than in the July Report, mainly reflecting softer-than-expected domestic demand. The drag from previous tax increases and spending cuts is expected to amount to 1.8 percentage points in 2013, and then to decline to 0.8 percentage points in 2014 and zero in 2015. Monetary policy remains highly stimulative, with members of the Federal Open Market Committee expecting the first increase in the federal funds rate to occur only in 2015.
 
The expansion of US private sector demand in 2014 and 2015 should be broad-based. Consumption is projected to increase at a more solid pace, supported by substantially healthier household balance sheets and improving labour market conditions. Residential investment should also increase vigorously, given the strong underlying fundamentals: the still-low level of mortgage interest rates, an expected rebound in household formation, significant pent-up demand, and the decline in both actual and shadow inventories of homes. Business investment will benefit from the improvement in demand, as well as from the solid financial positions of firms.
 
Exports are also projected to be an important driver of US economic growth through 2015, supported by strengthening foreign demand and improved competitiveness brought about by sustained gains in productivity and lower energy costs. While overseas oil imports should continue to fall, reflecting the expansion in domestic supply, non-oil imports are expected to increase steadily, driven by stronger domestic demand.
 
Overall, US economic activity is expected to strengthen as fiscal headwinds dissipate and household deleveraging ends. The Bank projects that the US economy will grow by 1.5 per cent in 2013, 2.5 per cent in 2014 and 3.3 per cent in 2015. Based on past dispersion of private sector forecasts, US economic growth in 2014 would be expected to fall within ± 0.5 percentage points of the Bank's projection, with a somewhat wider range in 2015.
 
US inflation has been on a declining trend since early 2012, owing to substantial slack in the economy and various temporary factors. As excess supply is gradually reduced over the projection period, inflation is expected to move back toward the Federal Reserve's 2 per cent inflation target.
 
Economic growth has resumed in the euro area, ending a six-quarter recession. Real GDP rose by 1.1 per cent in the second quarter of 2013, a significantly stronger result than anticipated in the July Report. Since then, survey indicators have suggested continued growth. The economic recovery is projected to proceed slowly, however, reflecting the need to rebuild private sector balance sheets, ongoing fiscal consolidation, tight credit conditions and depressed labour markets.
 
While labour market competitiveness has improved in the euro-area peripheral economies, substantial cross-country differences in growth prospects are expected to persist. A sustained recovery will require further progress in structural, fiscal and banking reforms (including a timely completion of the banking union). As a result, uncertainty remains elevated, and the possibility of an extended period of very slow growth, as well as financial system vulnerability, still represents a downside risk to the Bank's outlook for the euro area. However, the likelihood of that risk materializing has decreased.
 
Japan registered a strong upturn in economic activity in the first half of 2013. Real GDP growth averaged about 4 per cent over this period, supported by significant monetary and fiscal stimulus, a weaker yen, and improved confidence. Annual real GDP growth is expected to remain above the country's production potential over the projection horizon, reflecting the effects of Japan's ambitious program to revive economic growth and end deflation.  The pace of growth will nonetheless slow over 2014-15 as legislated increases in the value-added tax take effect. Inflation expectations have risen materially since the end of 2012 and core inflation is no longer negative, suggesting that deflationary pressures have abated.
 
Real GDP growth in China increased in the third quarter, supported by additional fiscal stimulus and a re-acceleration of investment in manufacturing. However, the continued reliance on investment activity, the rapid growth of credit and increases in housing prices have reinforced concerns about financial stability and the sustainability of economic growth.
 
Real GDP growth through 2015 is projected to remain close to the government's 2013 target of 7.5 per cent. Robust growth in productivity and income, underpinned by some progress on reform measures, should support a gradual strengthening of private consumption and more sustainable investment activity. However, structural impediments such as the lack of social safety nets and overinvestment in the export sector will slow the rebalancing of the economy. Existing financial imbalances, together with the recent robust expansion in credit and excess capacity in a number of sectors, represent a downside risk to the Bank's projection.
 
Economic activity has slowed in some EMEs. To limit the depreciation of their currencies resulting from recent large capital outflows, authorities in some emerging-market countries have undertaken additional exchange rate interventions, introduced new capital controls and increased policy interest rates. In the near term, growth will continue to be held back by tighter financial conditions and heightened uncertainty, as well as by persistent supply constraints.
 
Economic growth in EMEs is expected to pick up modestly over 2014-15, driven by some stabilization in credit conditions, progress on the implementation of structural reforms to alleviate supply bottlenecks and strengthening demand from the advanced economies. Nevertheless, the recent financial market turbulence in EMEs, combined with existing domestic imbalances in a number of countries, represents a downside risk to the Bank's outlook.
 
Commodity prices, as measured by the Bank of Canada's commodity price index , have fallen by 6 per cent since July and are expected to remain relatively flat over the projection horizon, with a drop in crude oil prices offsetting a projected rise in the price of non-energy commodities. On balance, however, the BCPI remains elevated, underpinned by expectations of sustained demand from China and a continued recovery in the advanced economies.
 
As measured by the Brent benchmark, global crude oil prices are little changed from their levels in July, while West Texas Intermediate prices have eased somewhat. Based on the latest futures curves, both Brent and WTI crude prices are assumed to decline by just under 15 per cent by the end of 2015, reflecting a continued robust increase in supply, especially from non-conventional sources, and a reduction in geopolitical concerns. Prices for Western Canada Select have fallen by more than 20 per cent since the release of the July Report, owing to higher production levels, ongoing transportation constraints and lower demand due to refinery outages in North America. As a result, the spread between WTI and WCS prices has widened to approximately US$30 per barrel - the highest level since the beginning of 2013. Based on the latest futures curves, WCS prices are expected to hover around current levels over the projection horizon, with the gap between WTI and WCS prices expected to narrow to about US$20 per barrel.
 
Natural gas prices in North America have moved up modestly in recent months. The latest futures curves suggest that prices will increase further, rising slightly above US$4 per million BTU by the end of 2015, owing to growing demand for electricity generation.
 
In aggregate, non-energy commodity prices have stayed relatively flat since July. Following a sharp correction over the April-June period, lumber prices have continued to recover, while base metals prices are little changed. In contrast, agricultural prices have declined in anticipation of record harvests for key grains. Prices for non-energy commodities are expected to rise by roughly 15 per cent over the projection horizon, supported by a gradual strengthening in global economic activity.
 
The projected acceleration in the growth of global demand should support a recovery of Canada's exports, although the composition has changed. Weaker growth in US output in the near term, particularly in business and residential investment, will dampen Canadian exports relative to what had been expected in July. Elevated commodity prices should continue to sustain the high level of investment in the resource sector in Canada and support Canadian incomes.
 
The Canadian dollar has averaged roughly 97 cents US since the September fixed announcement date, compared with the 96 cents US assumed in the July Report. By convention, the Canadian dollar is assumed to remain at or near its current level over the projection horizon.
 
Inflation in Canada has remained low in recent months, reflecting the significant amount of slack in the economy, heightened competitiveness pressures in the retail sector and certain sector-specific factors. At the same time, uncertain global and domestic economic conditions are delaying the pickup in Canada's exports and investment. As a result, the current level of economic activity is now estimated to be lower than was anticipated in the July Report. While household spending remains solid, the continued slowing in the growth of household credit and the rise in mortgage interest rates point to a gradual unwinding of household imbalances.
 
While some recent developments have not been as supportive as anticipated, the Bank expects that a better balance between domestic and foreign demand will be achieved over time, resulting in stronger and more self-sustaining economic growth. GDP growth is expected to surpass that of potential output over the next two years as foreign activity and business confidence strengthen, and underlying momentum builds in the Canadian economy. The output gap in the base-case projection is anticipated to close around the end of 2015. In the context of well-anchored inflation expectations, this will contribute to a gradual return of both core and total CPI inflation to 2 per cent over the same horizon.
 
Overall, the Bank judges that the risks to the inflation outlook are roughly balanced over the projection horizon.
 
Real GDP is expected to have expanded at a slower pace in the third quarter than anticipated in the July Report. This reflects weaker underlying momentum in exports and business fixed investment, as well as a smaller rebound from the temporary factors depressing growth in the second quarter. This composition of aggregate demand is less favourable for achieving sustainable growth.
 
Following a rebound in the first quarter, the performance of the export sector was lacklustre during the second and third quarters, with the exception of automotive and forestry products. Aside from temporary disruptions in the oil sector, the recent weakness in exports is indicative of a broader trend of slower-than-expected export growth that began in early 2012. As discussed in previous Reports, the weakness may be due to shifts in trade linkages that have been difficult to properly capture and to ongoing competitiveness challenges.
 
The projected expansion of US business and residential investment in 2014 is still expected to fuel a rise in the growth rate of exports, albeit at a somewhat more moderate pace than expected in July. As economic activity improves, both in the United States and globally, exports of non-energy commodities such as metals and forestry products are projected to post strong gains. Following several disruptions in 2013, crude oil exports are also expected to contribute significantly to growth in 2014 as production continues to expand. Non-commodity exports such as machinery and equipment, consumer goods (excluding automobiles), and services are also expected to strengthen gradually, but at a slower pace than other export sectors.
 
A key assumption underlying this projection is that the historical relationship between the growth rates of exports and foreign demand will gradually reassert itself once the recovery is more fully entrenched. There is a risk that this could take longer than anticipated. However, there are some encouraging signs that Canadian firms are taking steps to improve their export performance. Available evidence suggests that many Canadian firms have already begun, or are planning, to expand exports to the fastest-growing emerging markets.  Similarly, through the Bank's discussions with businesses for the Business Outlook Survey, a number of firms have reported that recent investments in innovation and marketing are supporting their ability to sell in existing or new export markets. They also consider that recent investments to improve efficiency or to lower costs are enhancing competitiveness. As the demand for Canadian exports rises and firms fully utilize their capital, this should spur productive investments and work to improve competitiveness further.
 
Against this backdrop, business investment is expected to strengthen, but with a more subdued profile than in the July Report, in line with the lower profile for exports. In particular, it is anticipated that business fixed investment will pick up over the next two years, consistent with historical relationships suggesting that business investment increases within about two to four quarters following a rise in exports. This view is supported by responses to the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey, which point to a growing number of firms reporting that they would face some difficulty meeting an unexpected increase in demand, since they are already using their existing labour and capital more intensively while awaiting signs that demand is strengthening. This is consistent with firms having some ability over the near term to accommodate strengthening demand but eventually needing to expand capacity.
 
With firms currently waiting to see a sustained increase in demand before committing to investment plans, investment intentions remain relatively subdued, even though indicators of business sentiment are close to their historical averages. However, there are some early signs that firms might be becoming more optimistic, since sentiment indicators have generally improved from the levels observed earlier in 2013, and have been accompanied by a rise in firm creation.  The Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey, together with other recently published private surveys, shows that firms expect a better performance over the next 12 months than over the past 12 months.
 
Solid underlying conditions are also building a supportive foundation for investment. Corporate balance sheets are healthy, with low aggregate leverage and abundant levels of working capital. Despite higher long-term interest rates, financial conditions in Canada remain accommodative, given the considerable monetary stimulus currently in place. This is underscored by responses to both the Bank's Senior Loan Officer Survey and the Business Outlook Survey, which indicate that business-lending conditions remain favourable. Indeed, there has been some firming in business credit growth in recent months, including strong bond issuance, partly because firms are locking in at relatively low rates.
 
Household expenditures (for both consumption and residential investment) have been stronger than was anticipated in July. Consumption has been underpinned by an improvement in consumer confidence, together with gains in employment and disposable income, and by the large financing incentives offered on purchases of automobiles. The recent vigour in residential investment may partly reflect activity that has been pulled forward in anticipation of higher interest rates on mortgages. However, the growth of household credit has continued to slow and is well below its historical average, consistent with a gradual unwinding of household imbalances. Market intelligence suggests that a number of contributing factors, including a reduction in purchases by first-time homebuyers and larger debt repayments, are also likely to be playing a role.
 
Despite slowing growth in household credit, consumption is still expected to increase at a moderate pace, in tandem with the expansion of disposable income. This profile is consistent with a high degree of consumer caution, which is reflected in a savings rate that is well above the average of the past decade.
 
Credit conditions for households continue to be supportive of household expenditures, with effective borrowing rates at low levels. However, the increase in mortgage rates in recent months should exert a slight dampening effect on residential investment over coming quarters. Residential investment is therefore projected to decline from the current historically high levels toward a more sustainable position. The household debt-to-income ratio, which edged up in the second quarter and is at a high level, should have a flat-to-lower profile over the projection horizon. In the base-case projection, debt-service ratios will rise gradually but will remain low.
 
While the Bank expects household caution to dampen spending over the forecast horizon, it is possible that, with still-favourable borrowing conditions, household expenditures could gather renewed momentum. The firmness in a range of housing market indicators in recent months reinforces this possibility. If the market strengthens further, it could increase the risk of a correction in house prices down the road.
 
Relative to the July Report, the outlook for economic growth in Canada is somewhat weaker over the projection horizon, owing to reduced contributions from net exports and business investment. The Bank forecasts an improvement in the underlying momentum of the economy through 2014 as external demand strengthens and business confidence rises. On an average annual basis, real GDP growth is projected to increase from 1.6 per cent in 2013 to 2.3 per cent in 2014 and 2.6 per cent in 2015. Given the degree of uncertainty inherent in projections, the Bank judges that GDP growth will likely be within ± 0.5 percentage points of the base-case projection in 2014, with a somewhat wider range in 2015.
 
The pickup in the economy is projected to be driven by a rebound in the contribution of net exports. This dynamic is also expected to stimulate a more solid contribution from business fixed investment over time. The economy will continue to be supported by moderate growth in consumer spending, while residential investment will remain relatively flat, consistent with a convergence toward a more sustainable level of activity. Government spending is expected to contribute only very marginally to real GDP growth over the projection horizon, in line with the plans of federal, provincial and local governments to consolidate spending to achieve fiscal balance.
 
Potential output grew at a noticeably slower pace during the recession. Since 2010, the growth of Canada's production potential has begun a gradual recovery, as trend labour productivity picked up with the strong rebound in business investment.  Although much uncertainty surrounds estimates of potential output, the Bank projects that the profile for business investment will lead to further capital deepening (i.e., more capital will be available to workers) and will contribute to continued improvements in trend labour productivity over the next couple of years. In this regard, the expected rise in machinery and equipment investment, which has been relatively weak in recent years, should support the future performance of labour productivity. However, demographic factors, primarily the aging population, are expected to result in a slowdown in the growth rate of trend labour input and to largely offset these other effects.
 
On an average annual basis, potential GDP is expected to advance at a rate of around 2 per cent over the projection horizon, with a range of ± 0.3 percentage points. This is slightly weaker than assumed in the previous projection.
 
Taking into account the various indicators of capacity pressures, the Bank judges that the amount of slack in the economy in the third quarter of 2013 was between 1 and 2 per cent. While this range for the output gap reflects the significant uncertainty surrounding any point estimate, the Bank is building the base-case economic projection using the midpoint of the range (i.e., 1.5 per cent). This is a somewhat greater degree of slack than expected in the July Report, mainly because the level of real GDP in the third quarter was lower than anticipated by 0.4 per cent.
 
The Bank's conventional measure suggests that the output gap was close to the lower end of the 1 to 2 per cent range. Moreover, recent data from the Bank's autumn Business Outlook Survey, which show that the indicators of labour shortages and capacity pressures have increased, are consistent with a gap near the lower end of this range. In the present environment of weak demand and ongoing uncertainty about future demand, firms are using existing capacity more intensively and waiting to make investments that would increase capacity. As they adjust their operations to current needs, more firms are reporting some challenges finding workers with specific skills or for specific positions.
 
An alternative structural approach suggests that the output gap is closer to 2 per cent in the third quarter. This reflects material slack in total hours worked, as well as a level of labour productivity that is considerably below its trend. Other labour market indicators also point to a somewhat greater degree of slack than the conventional measure. For example, the proportion of involuntary part-time workers and the average duration of unemployment are still elevated, and wage increases remain subdued.
 
With the projected profile for growth in real GDP exceeding the assumed growth of potential output over the next two years, the Bank expects that the economy will gradually return to full production capacity around the end of 2015. On balance, the economy is projected to operate with a slightly larger amount of slack over the next two years than was anticipated in the July Report.
 
Both core and total CPI inflation remain subdued. With a larger and more persistent amount of excess supply in the economy than projected in July, the return to target is now expected to take place somewhat later than previously anticipated.
 
Core inflation edged up from an average of 1.2 per cent in the second quarter to an average of 1.3 per cent in the third quarter. Low core inflation continues to reflect persistent material excess capacity in the economy, heightened competitiveness pressures and certain sector-specific factors.
 
These factors include the impact of the unwinding of the sharp rise in global agricultural prices on core food prices, as well as lower auto insurance premiums in Ontario.
 
Various alternative measures of core inflation have all fallen to well below 2 per cent since the second half of 2012. Abstracting from idiosyncratic developments that affect some of these measures, the Bank assesses underlying inflation to be around 1.5 per cent.
 
The estimated impact of temporary factors on inflation is subject to some uncertainty. The Bank's base-case projection assumes that these temporary factors will gradually dissipate in coming quarters. Competitiveness pressures in the retail sector are expected to continue to dampen the level of prices, although their effects on the inflation rate are expected to dissipate in late 2014. With well-anchored inflation expectations, core inflation is projected to return slowly to 2 per cent around the end of 2015 as excess capacity is absorbed.
 
Total CPI inflation also remains subdued, at just above 1 per cent on average in the third quarter, up from an average of 0.7 per cent in the second quarter. This reflects not only the rise in core inflation but also firmer prices for a number of volatile components, notably gasoline. The lower level of total CPI inflation relative to core largely reflects downward pressure from mortgage interest costs. Total CPI inflation is expected to return gradually to target around the end of 2015.
 
Indicators of inflation expectations remain consistent with the Bank's projection, which shows inflation remaining below the 2 per cent target until around the end of 2015. In this regard, the October Consensus Economics forecasts for total CPI inflation were 1.1 per cent in 2013 and 1.8 per cent in 2014. According to the latest Business Outlook Survey, inflation expectations are little changed. While almost all firms expect CPI inflation to be within the Bank's 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control range over the next two years, the majority expect it to remain in the bottom half of that range. A number of firms cited the current lack of inflationary pressures and subdued demand as factors driving their expectations. Market-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations continue to be consistent with the 2 per cent inflation-control target.
 
A reasonable range around the base-case projection for total inflation in 2014 is ± 0.3 percentage points. This range is intended to measure ex ante forecast uncertainty. A complement to this range is shown in Chart 26 and Chart 27. These fan charts are derived using statistical analysis of ex post errors from the Bank's projection models. They depict the 50 per cent and 90 per cent confidence bands for year-over-year core inflation and total CPI inflation from the fourth quarter of 2013 to the end of 2015.
 
The fundamentals that drive the outlook for inflation are subject to several risks emanating from both the external environment and the domestic economy. The overall uncertainty surrounding the outlook is lower than it was a year ago, in part because the risks of some extreme events, such as a reintensification of the euro-area crisis, are significantly lower. The Bank judges that the risks to the projected inflation path are roughly balanced.
 
The most important external risks are:
 
More-robust economic growth than projected in the advanced economies is the major upside risk to inflation in Canada. Once the drag from fiscal policy dissipates, the United States is poised for faster growth, given the adjustments that have already occurred in the financial and household sectors. Growth in Europe and Japan has been faster than expected. The combined effect might produce a virtuous circle in which a more rapid recovery boosts confidence that will feed back into demand. Greater global demand would in turn translate into higher exports for Canada, rising commodity prices and an improvement in the terms of trade, which will support higher incomes and spending.
 
Despite the recent improvement in economic conditions in the euro area and the reduced risk of a reintensification of the euro-area crisis, labour markets remain severely stressed, and progress on critical reforms has been slow. This could lead to a more protracted and difficult recovery, punctuated by renewed bouts of financial turbulence and uncertainty. Since Canada's direct trade links to the euro area are limited, the effects would be felt mainly through confidence and financial channels, as well as through indirect trade links.
 
The most important domestic risks are:
 
Canada's exports have been much weaker than anticipated and only a portion of that weakness can be explained by slower growth in foreign demand. While the base-case forecast assumes that the wedge between the level of exports and foreign demand will persist over the projection period, there is a possibility that exports could be even weaker than assumed. This risk could materialize if, for example, competitiveness challenges are greater than anticipated, resulting in an even larger loss of market share than assumed for exports. Reduced exports would likely translate into slower growth in business investment, since there would be less need to expand capacity. Together, weaker exports and business investment would pose a downside risk to inflation.
 
Uncertainty about the strength of domestic and foreign demand is weighing heavily on firms' investment intentions. Once the recovery in foreign demand becomes more solidly entrenched, and with domestic demand continuing to grow at a moderate pace, business sentiment could improve rapidly. The sequence of stronger exports, rising confidence and increased investment could result in stronger overall growth and is an upside risk to the inflation outlook.
 
The elevated level of household debt and stretched valuations in some segments of the housing market remain an important downside risk to the Canadian economy. The continued slowing in household credit growth and the rise in mortgage interest rates point to a gradual unwinding of household imbalances. However, recent data suggest some risk of renewed momentum in the housing market. This would provide a temporary boost to economic activity, but could exacerbate existing imbalances and therefore increase the probability of a correction later on. Such a correction could have sizable spillover effects to other parts of the economy and to inflation.