Global economic growth is solid and broad-based, but the outlook is subject to considerable risk from escalating trade tensions. The expansion has been underpinned by an upswing in world trade and business investment. In the United States, new government spending plans, in addition to previously announced tax cuts, are expected to boost growth over the next few years. The growth outlook for most other regions is also modestly stronger than anticipated in the January Monetary Policy Report. Global growth is expected to ease from around 3 3/4 per cent in 2018 to about 3 1/2 per cent in 2020.
 
This projection incorporates a higher estimated level of potential output for some major advanced economies, partly reflecting greater labour force participation. The additional estimated capacity is likely a contributing factor to subdued inflation in 2017. More recently, core inflation has firmed. Financial conditions remain supportive of growth, and market volatility, triggered in part by geopolitical and trade-policy concerns, has risen from extraordinarily low levels.
 
Trade policy is an increasingly prominent risk to the global economic expansion. US tariff announcements and proposed retaliatory actions by China raise the risk of a more pronounced shift away from a multilateral, rules-based system. A wide range of outcomes are still possible for the renegotiation of the North American Free Trade Agreement. Even without changes in trade arrangements, increased concerns about trade policies could lead to a sharper-than-expected tightening of financial conditions, lower confidence and a more pronounced slowing of growth. The Bank's base-case scenario, while predicated on the assumption that existing agreements will remain in place, continues to incorporate adverse effects from uncertainty on global investment and NAFTA-related judgment specific to Canada and Mexico. By convention, the direct impacts of tariffs announced by the United States and China will be added to the Bank's forecast if, and when, they are implemented.
 
The US economy has been expanding at a solid pace, with private domestic demand rebounding at the end of 2017. Softness in consumption in the first quarter of 2018 is expected to be transitory. The labour market has been strong: more than 200,000 new jobs were created per month, on average, over the past six months. Rising prime-age labour force participation in recent years has also contributed to a higher estimate of potential output. Tax reform and deregulation may have increased incentives to shift investment to the United States from other jurisdictions.
 
Sizable fiscal stimulus should lift growth over the course of the next three years. New legislation since the January Report authorizes more than US$300 billion in extra federal expenditures. The combined budgetary impact of the planned spending increase and recent tax reforms is expected to amount to roughly US$1 trillion over the projection horizon, which should provide a material boost to growth. Since the US economy is already operating at around potential, the new spending is expected to add some additional upward pressure on inflation and bond yields.
 
The US economy is now forecast to grow on average at about 2 3/4 per cent over 2018-19, well above the rate of potential growth. Consumption is expected to rise at a healthy pace, underpinned by a strong labour market and fiscal stimulus. Business investment should be supported by a solid expansion of private demand, as well as by tax changes. Gross domestic product growth is projected to ease to around 2 per cent in 2020, close to US potential growth, as support from fiscal and monetary policy diminishes.
 
The euro area saw broad-based growth of about 2 3/4 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2017, and recent developments indicate that the economy will likely continue to grow above potential. Job gains have been healthy, and business and consumer confidence have remained high. The pace of growth is anticipated to slow from 2 1/4 per cent to 1 1/2 per cent by 2020 as capacity constraints intensify and monetary policy stimulus is gradually withdrawn. This profile is somewhat stronger than in January, reflecting upward revisions to potential growth and more solid domestic demand.
 
In Japan, an improved global backdrop and high consumer confidence have supported a healthy expansion in business investment and consumption. GDP growth is projected to be around 1 1/2 per cent in 2018, and to moderate significantly by 2020 in the wake of a planned 2019 hike in the value-added tax.
 
The Chinese economy grew by close to 7 per cent in 2017, stronger than anticipated in the January Report, with some extra momentum spilling into 2018. Growth is still expected to decline from around 6 1/2 per cent in 2018 to near 6 per cent in 2020, as part of the continued transition to more sustainable growth. Financial sector measures adopted since the start of 2017 have constrained the expansion of shadow banking and contributed to a softening of credit growth. Nevertheless, financial vulnerabilities remain elevated.
 
The ongoing expansion in other oil-importing emerging-market economies is anticipated to continue to support global growth. Exchange rate depreciation in some countries and strong external demand suggest a brighter outlook for exports than in January, leading to a somewhat faster pace of expansion of around 4 1/4 per cent over the projection. In oil-exporting countries, the effects of ongoing fiscal consolidation and past oil price declines are expected to continue to dissipate, leading to a pickup in growth.
 
US core inflation has continued to firm, as anticipated. Core inflation is expected to rise further in the coming quarters as the economy experiences more excess demand and the transitory effect of the past decline in telecommunication prices passes. US wage growth has been moderate by most measures but is expected to pick up with a tightening labour market. Core inflation in the euro area and Japan has increased since the end of 2017. Inflation in these regions is nonetheless still soft and is anticipated to rise only gradually toward central bank targets over the projection horizon.
 

US government bond yields have risen since January, reflecting actual and expected changes in monetary policy. Monetary policy normalization is occurring from different starting points and at different speeds, with the United States further along than other advanced economies. In many advanced economies where policy interest rates were constrained by their effective lower bounds, central banks have relied on unconventional tools, including quantitative easing and forward guidance. As these policy interventions are unwound, the dampening effects of monetary policy on volatility are diminishing.
 
Financial conditions are still supportive of economic activity, even with recent yield increases and equity price declines. Despite the more robust US outlook, and expectations of additional monetary tightening, the US dollar is around 5 per cent lower on a trade-weighted basis than it was a year ago. Term premiums and risk premiums remain low by historical standards. Faster-than-expected increases in interest rates, potentially triggered by inflation concerns, could lead to financial market turbulence globally. In some EMEs, the February rise in financial market volatility caused a brief increase in portfolio outflows, highlighting the vulnerability of these countries to sharper increases in yields.
 
The recent averages of global oil prices are largely in line with those assumed in the January Report. Higher global oil demand and lower production by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries have led to inventory declines, reducing the downside risk to prices. US shale rig counts have continued to rise, and US oil production has increased by more than one million barrels per day since April 2017.
 
The largely offsetting strength in both demand growth and US shale output growth suggests that risks to oil prices are roughly balanced. By convention, the Bank assumes that oil prices will stay near their recent levels throughout the projection horizon.
 
While the spread between West Texas Intermediate and Western Canada Select has narrowed recently, it remains wide due to transportation constraints. Natural gas prices, meanwhile, have dropped sharply due to weather-related demand fluctuations in North America and longer-term increases in supply.
 
After steadily rising over the second half of 2017, the Bank's non-energy commodity price index has been relatively stable since January. Robust US housing starts and rail bottlenecks have led to stronger lumber prices. Newly announced tariffs by the United States and China have weighed on prices for iron ore and some agricultural commodities, such as hogs. Looking ahead, the BCNE is expected to remain near its current level.
 
Canada's economic growth has moderated, and the economy is operating close to capacity. While a moderation was anticipated, temporary factors notably, volatility in trade shipments, amplified by transport bottlenecks, and the dynamic response of housing markets to regulatory changes—are resulting in sizable short-term fluctuations in growth.
 
Looking through these fluctuations, economic growth is projected to average slightly above that of potential output over the next three years. Real GDP growth is now projected to be about 2 per cent in both 2018 and 2019 and to ease to 1.8 per cent in 2020, the estimated growth rate of potential. This profile reflects a slight downward revision in 2018 and a more notable upward revision in 2019 relative to the January projection. The higher profile for economic activity incorporates additional fiscal stimulus and upward revisions to the estimated profiles of potential output and national income.
 
Over the projection horizon, the composition of growth is expected to shift, with a declining contribution from household spending and a rising relative contribution from business investment and exports. Higher interest rates are anticipated to contribute to this adjustment. Monetary and fiscal policy are expected to support economic activity over the projection horizon and to help mitigate the drag on business investment and exports associated with trade-policy uncertainty and competitiveness challenges.
 
Inflation is close to target. Both consumer price index inflation and the Bank's preferred measures of core inflation have recently increased to around 2 per cent. The temporary factors putting upward pressure on inflation, namely gasoline prices and minimum wage increases, more than offset the diminishing drag from electricity and food prices. Since these upward pressures are expected to persist longer than the downward pressures, CPI inflation is forecast to be modestly higher in 2018 than anticipated in January but to still return to about the 2 per cent target thereafter.
 
While real GDP is expected to grow at around 2 per cent, on average, in the first half of 2018, the Bank anticipates a swing in quarter-over-quarter growth rates. Fluctuations are found mainly in exports, housing and investment. Accounting for these factors, economic activity is estimated to have expanded by 1.3 per cent in the first quarter and is forecast to rebound and grow by 2.5 per cent in the second quarter.
 
Exports declined in the first quarter, in part reflecting transportation issues that interrupted the shipment of some commodities. These disruptions are anticipated to be temporary, and export growth is expected to rebound in the second quarter, led by a large increase in exports of crude oil as production growth continues. Non-energy commodity exports, such as lumber and agricultural products, will begin growing again as the backlog of shipments caused by poor weather and capacity issues in rail transportation are addressed.
 
Housing activity is estimated to have contracted sharply in the first quarter, following the implementation of the revised B-20 Guideline. The contraction was amplified as some homebuyers acted quickly in the fourth quarter of 2017 to purchase a home before being subject to the new measure. In the second quarter of 2018, housing activity is expected to pick up as resales start to recover.
 
Investment growth likely paused in the first quarter, due mainly to the completion of some major energy projects late in 2017. The contraction of energy investment should offset the ongoing expansion of investment in other sectors. The positive trend in investment spending is expected to reassert itself in the second quarter of 2018. Recent import data continue to signal robust growth of investment in machinery and equipment.
 
Compared with the January projection, economic growth was weaker in the fourth quarter of 2017, mainly because of stronger-than-expected imports of machinery and equipment. While real GDP expanded at close to potential growth, the contribution of domestic demand was strong. The estimate for economic growth in the first quarter of 2018 is also revised down, largely reflecting the shifting of activity across quarters.
 
With this Report, the Bank provides its annual reassessment of the ranges of potential output growth. Potential output growth is expected to be stronger than estimated in April 2017, at 1.8 per cent between 2018 and 2020, and 1.9 per cent in 2021. Growth of trend labour productivity is expected to improve, owing to stronger business investment. Trend labour input growth will continue to slow, due to population aging, with immigration providing only a partial offset. The Bank's assessment of potential output is subject to considerable uncertainty, and thus the estimates are presented as a range.
 
With positive revisions to potential output and a lower-than-expected level of GDP, the Bank judges that the output gap in the first quarter of 2018 was between -0.75 and +0.25 per cent. While this range is somewhat lower than assessed in January, it still implies that the Canadian economy has been operating close to capacity for three consecutive quarters.
 
Although firms added to the economy's potential in recent quarters by increasingly investing in machinery, equipment and structures and expanding employment, some continue to face significant production constraints.
 
The level of potential output in the fourth quarter of 2017 is estimated to have been 0.3 per cent higher than assumed in the January Report. This reflects an upward revision to trend labour input due to strong employment gains in 2017. The most recent data also show that the level of real GDP was 0.1 per cent weaker than expected in the fourth quarter of 2017.
 
The overall industrial rate of capacity utilization is now close to its historical peak, with several sectors at or near their post-2003 highs. In addition, the spring Business Outlook Survey indicated that capacity pressures have moderated but are still close to recent highs, particularly outside the oil- and gas-producing regions.
 
The labour market continues to improve across sectors and regions, although the growth of employment and hours worked has slowed since the beginning of 2018. The unemployment rate remains near its 40-year low. Job vacancies have risen by nearly 25 per cent over the past year and were at 470,000 in the fourth quarter of 2017, considerably higher than the typical annual expansion of employment. Strong hiring intentions and more difficulties recruiting, as reported in the most recent BOS, also point to tightening labour markets and shrinking labour market slack. However, there are remaining elements of unemployment and underemployment: the long-term unemployment rate is still relatively high, the youth participation rate has room to increase, and BOS respondents in the oil- and gas-producing regions continue to point to remaining labour market slack.
 
The overall improvement in the labour market has been contributing to rising wages. Firms surveyed in the spring BOS report signs of increasing wage pressures, due to competition for labour and, to a lesser extent, minimum wage increases. Wage growth is somewhat below what would be expected were the economy operating with no excess labour.
 
Measures of CPI inflation and core inflation are around 2 per cent, consistent with the economy operating close to capacity. Since its trough in the middle of 2017, CPI inflation has firmed, as expected, with the absorption of excess capacity and the dissipation of some temporary factors.
 
CPI inflation in the first quarter was higher than anticipated at the time of the January Report. The positive surprise was associated with the prices for air transportation and semi-durables, and for some services that were affected by the higher minimum wage in some provinces. The impact of these price shocks on inflation is expected to be temporary. Meanwhile, recent monthly fluctuations in CPI inflation have mostly reflected transitory movements in gasoline prices.
 
The Bank's three preferred measures of core inflation moved up, as expected, reflecting diminished downward pressure from excess capacity. The pickup in CPI-common since the beginning of 2018 reflects in part the impact of the recent minimum wage increases.
 
The Bank projects that the economy will expand slightly faster than potential output over 2018 and 2019, and then grow with potential. The composition of growth is expected to gradually shift, with the contribution of investment and exports increasing, while that of household spending declines.
 
The economic outlook has been revised up since January to reflect the positive implications of stronger potential output growth and recently tabled federal and provincial budgets. The Bank estimates that the measures contained in the new provincial budgets, if enacted, will add about 0.4 per cent to the level of real GDP by the end of 2020. The macroeconomic impact of the new federal budget on GDP over the projection horizon is expected to be similar to that in the January Report, which was based on the Fall Economic Statement 2017.
 
Higher interest rates and slowing growth in disposable income are expected to gradually dampen household spending growth over the projection horizon. The pace of expansion of household credit has slowed since last summer, indicating that higher interest rates and measures affecting the housing market are beginning to have an impact on borrowing behaviour. The projection continues to incorporate a greater sensitivity of household spending to interest rate increases when debt levels are elevated; this sensitivity will be reassessed over time with incoming data.
 
In 2018, consumption is expected to continue to contribute significantly to growth, supported by elevated consumer confidence and ongoing employment and wage increases. The contribution of residential investment is expected to decline. New construction is forecast to contribute positively, particularly in Ontario, where housing demand has been outpacing supply.
 
However, this is expected to be offset by the softness of resales, which should recover only gradually from the contraction at the beginning of the year.
 
In 2019 and 2020, consumption and residential investment growth are both expected to moderate. Although the rate of household formation is anticipated to remain robust, housing activity is expected to gradually decline due to the higher interest rates and the longer-run impact of the housing measures. At the same time, consumption and income growth are projected to slow in tandem, and the savings rate is therefore anticipated to remain largely stable.
 
Although restrained by trade-policy uncertainty and ongoing competitiveness challenges, business investment is expected to continue its recovery. This expansion should be supported by ongoing increases in foreign and domestic demand, rising capacity pressures and positive business sentiment. Growth of investment spending is expected to be particularly robust for firms in the service and information technology sectors.
 
Despite strengthening global demand, growth of business investment in export-oriented goods industries is anticipated to be restrained by elevated uncertainty around trade policy, regulatory concerns and incentives to shift investment to the United States following the US tax reform. In the spring BOS, some businesses confirmed that these factors are affecting their investment decisions.
 
In the energy sector, which accounts for roughly 20 per cent of business investment in Canada, the Bank forecasts that investment will decrease in 2018 and remain roughly flat thereafter. Investment in new projects is being held back by reduced competitiveness resulting from regulatory and US policy changes. Roughly half of Canadian oil production is considered heavy, with WCS prices serving as the appropriate benchmark. Transportation bottlenecks led to a widening of the WTI-WCS spread. Only a part of heavy oil production is subject to the full discount in WCS prices, however, since some oil producers have integrated refinery operations and dedicated shipping capacity. Nevertheless, relatively low prices for WCS and limited pipeline and rail capacity out of Western Canada could discourage longer-term investment in the oil sands.
 
Non-commodity exports are projected to grow at about the rate of foreign demand, although they are not expected to recover the ground lost relative to global activity and the associated rise in global trade volumes over the past several quarters. The steady downtrend in Canada's share of US non-energy goods imports has not slowed despite the depreciation of the Canadian dollar in recent years and is indicative of the ongoing competitiveness challenges that some Canadian exporters face. While a substantial part of this trend may be explained by the growing importance of China in global trade, factors specific to Canada have also played a role. Lower vehicle production mandates, which led to a sizable contraction in the auto sector, are expected to continue to limit auto sector exports. In addition, for some other industries, capacity constraints will restrain exports. Exporters participating in the Bank's spring BOS reported capacity constraints and labour shortages, as well as negative effects of protectionism on their sales prospects.
 
While the level of non-commodity exports has been held back, looking ahead, they are expected to expand, boosted by the ongoing strength in foreign demand. Exports of a wide range of Canadian goods are expected to benefit, including aircraft, medium and heavy trucks, and specialized machinery and equipment. Service exports that are expected to benefit include transportation; tourism; and telecommunications, computer and information services. In addition, ongoing technological change, especially in the digital economy, is expected to continue to drive strong growth of related service exports. With their anticipated robust pace of growth, service exports should increase as a share of Canadian exports.
 
Commodities exports are anticipated to expand at a solid pace given the projected expansions of both production and demand, although this growth is expected to be constrained by ongoing transportation challenges.
 
CPI inflation is anticipated to remain modestly above 2 per cent until the end of 2018. Temporary factors, namely elevated gasoline prices and the impact of minimum wage increases, are expected to more than offset the fading effects of electricity price rebates and low food price inflation. In 2019, inflation is expected to return to about 2 per cent.
 
The Bank continues to monitor closely the impact of global and technological factors on inflation. To date, their impact on Canadian inflation does not appear to be significant.
 
Relative to January, the projection for CPI inflation in 2018 is revised up by 0.3 percentage points, due to higher-than-expected prices for intercity transport and semi-durable goods and stronger-than-expected effects of the minimum wage increases. The effects of these factors are expected to dissipate by early 2019.
 
This projection is consistent with medium- and long-term inflation expectations remaining well anchored. Most respondents to the BOS anticipate that inflation will remain between 1 and 3 per cent over the next two years. A little more than half of them now expect inflation to be in the upper half of that range, owing to tighter labour markets, higher commodity prices and minimum wage increases. The March 2018 Consensus Economics forecast 
for CPI inflation is 2.1 per cent in 2018 and 2.0 per cent in 2019. Responses to a quarterly question on long-term inflation expectations show an average of 1.9 per cent through 2028.
 
Based on the past dispersion of private sector forecasts, a reasonable range around the base-case projection for CPI inflation is ±0.3 percentage points. This range is intended to convey a sense of forecast uncertainty. A complementary perspective is provided using statistical analysis of the Bank's forecast errors, which suggests that a 50 per cent confidence interval around the base-case projection widens from ±0.3 percentage points in the second quarter of 2018 to ±0.6 percentage points by the end of 2020. Over the same period, a 90 per cent confidence band widens from ±0.6 to ±1.5 percentage points.
 
The prospect of a notable shift toward protectionist global trade policies remains the most important risk affecting the outlook. While the Bank's base-case scenario incorporates the adverse effects of the associated higher uncertainty on firms' investment and export activities, it otherwise assumes that existing trade arrangements will be maintained over the projection horizon. Based on this assumption, the Bank assesses that the risks to the projected path for inflation are roughly balanced. The evolution of risks since January is summarized in Table 4. The risks listed below include several that are similar to those identified in January. With the gradual evolution of economic conditions in Canada and abroad, the Bank has chosen to highlight an additional risk.
 
Even with a cautious projection for exports, non-energy goods exports could disappoint, given ongoing competitiveness challenges and limited capacity. Firms may respond to the expansion in foreign demand by investing outside Canada rather than investing in and exporting from Canada. Such a reallocation would have various negative effects on the Canadian economy, including lower production capacity and lower domestic demand due to reduced employment in the export sector.
 
Financial conditions remain broadly accommodative, but could tighten suddenly. Heightened trade tensions, a repricing of the future path of monetary policy, or a faster pickup in wage and price inflation could trigger such a tightening. Tighter financial conditions could manifest as a rise in bond yields and potentially disruptive portfolio adjustments. These disruptions could translate into a decline in confidence and economic activity (especially in sectors sensitive to interest rates), reduced wealth, a rise in debt-service burdens, and weaker global and Canadian growth.
 
The outlook for US economic growth has been revised up to reflect new government spending. However, growth could be even stronger if tax reform and deregulation in the United States trigger "animal spirits" in an environment of accommodative financial conditions, elevated equity prices and high corporate profits. The resulting boost to investment, as well as stronger household spending, would have positive implications for Canadian investment and exports.
 
Elevated consumer confidence could lead to stronger consumer spending than in the base-case projection. The vulnerabilities associated with household indebtedness would be exacerbated if the additional spending were financed by additional borrowing.
 
While there appears to be some moderation in prices and less speculative demand, a sizable decline in house prices in some markets could still be possible. A drop in house prices would likely dampen residential investment and consumption.