Recent data point to a somewhat stronger pickup in global economic growth than had been expected at the time of the January Monetary Policy Report. However, the considerable uncertainty noted in January, particularly regarding US economic policy, continues to cloud the outlook. This uncertainty is expected to persist as the possible changes under consideration, notably in relation to fiscal and trade policies, would involve complex and probably lengthy negotiations and changes to legislation.
 
With inflation strengthening and the labour market nearing full employment, the US Federal Reserve increased the federal funds rate by 25 basis points in mid-March. Even with this step toward normalization, US monetary policy remains accommodative. Financial conditions globally continue to support growth.
 
Global economic growth is projected to increase from around 3 1/4 per cent in 2017 to about 3 1/2 per cent over 2018-19, broadly unchanged since January. This projection incorporates a slower track for global potential growth than previously assumed. The uncertainty around US trade policy is also now expected to dampen the pickup in trade and investment growth globally.
 
Yields on long-term sovereign bonds are broadly unchanged since the January Report and remain low by historical standards, reflecting in part ongoing quantitative easing in some advanced economies. Equity prices are higher and credit spreads are narrower than in January, partly in response to improved expectations for global growth. Measures of market volatility across most asset classes have been relatively low, in contrast to continuing high levels of uncertainty in relation to US trade policy and perceptions of significant political risk, for example, in Europe. In foreign exchange markets, the Canadian dollar is little changed against the US dollar but has depreciated against the currencies of other important trade partners, such as Mexico.
 
The US economy is anticipated to grow at around 2 per cent over the projection horizon, amid unusually high levels of policy uncertainty. Temporary factors, including a weather-related decline in the consumption of utilities, likely explain most of the weakness in first-quarter growth. The fiscal stimulus incorporated into the projection is now assumed to begin somewhat later than in the January projection, reflecting possible legislative challenges. Potential output growth has also been adjusted lower.
 
Strong domestic fundamentals should continue to underpin a moderate pace of growth. Consumption growth is expected to remain solid, supported by anticipated tax cuts and a strong labour market. Residential investment, meanwhile, is projected to grow at a robust pace, given rising household income and demographic demand. Although business investment was a source of drag in 2016, growth was positive in the latter part of the year and should continue to recover, given the rebound in energy investment and the strong prospects for domestic demand. Net exports, in contrast, are expected to remain a drag on growth, given the past appreciation of the US dollar and a boost in imports from firm domestic demand.
 
While the timing and nature of US fiscal policy changes remain unknown, the base-case projection embeds fiscal stimulus that is assumed to boost the level of gross domestic product by 0.5 per cent by mid-2019. The cumulative amount of stimulus is the same as that built into the January Report, but it has been delayed in the projection given indications that it will take longer than previously anticipated to implement corporate and personal tax cuts. Starting in 2019, expenditure cuts are now expected to modestly dampen the amount of fiscal stimulus. These assumptions will continue to be updated as the budgetary process unfolds.
 
With the labour market close to full employment and core inflation increasing, markets expect several further increases in the federal funds rate in 2017 and beyond. This contrasts with other major economies such as the euro area and Japan, where economic recoveries are not as advanced and monetary policy is expected to remain accommodative for longer.
 
The outlook for economic growth in the euro area has strengthened in recent months. Increased lending to households and a rebound in residential investment supported growth in the latter part of 2016, and recent indicators suggest a faster-than-anticipated pace of expansion in 2017. Highly accommodative monetary conditions and an improving labour market have underpinned this progress and should continue to sustain domestic demand. The pace of expansion should nevertheless remain modest, at around 1 1/2 per cent, over the projection horizon, tempered by slow potential output growth and political uncertainty.
 
In Japan, domestic demand has been more sluggish than expected in January and should continue to be restrained by tepid wage growth. Economic growth has therefore become more reliant on exports, which have been supported by a weaker yen and robust demand from emerging Asia. Overall, growth is projected to remain at around 1 per cent over 2017-19, in line with expectations in the January Report.
 
The Chinese economy has performed more strongly than expected in January. A boost in investment resulted in faster-than-expected growth at the end of 2016, while recent data suggest a stronger-than-anticipated start to 2017. China's economic rebalancing toward more consumption-based growth is occurring in an environment of elevated financial vulnerabilities. In managing the transition, Chinese authorities have been seeking to maintain growth while taking steps to address these vulnerabilities through, for example, restrictions on new housing purchases and selective tightening of lending rates. Capital outflows seem to have moderated, partly reflecting last year's tightening of capital controls. Overall, growth in China is expected to ease gradually over the projection horizon, from 6.5 per cent in 2017 to 6.3 per cent in 2018-19.
 
Incoming data show that the pace of economic activity has also improved in other oil-importing emerging-market economies , particularly in Asia. This is in contrast to Brazil, where the economic contraction has been deeper than expected but should ease over the projection, helped in part by past increases in commodity prices. Overall, the pace of GDP growth in oil-importing EMEs is expected to continue to strengthen, from 3.7 per cent in 2017 to 4.2 per cent in 2019, supported by a return to positive growth in some distressed economies. This pickup is more modest than expected in the January Report, however, reflecting a downward revision to potential growth primarily because of delays in implementing growth-enhancing structural reforms.
 
Potential growth has also been revised down in oil-exporting countries, including Saudi Arabia and Russia, reflecting weaker investment following past oil price declines. As a result, the anticipated rebound in economic growth in the "rest of the world" grouping is now expected to be weaker than indicated in January, rising from about 2 per cent in 2017 to around 2 3/4 per cent by 2019, as the drag from past oil price declines dissipates.
 
Oil prices have been relatively stable since January, reflecting a number of offsetting factors. Demand has been stronger than expected, and there has been a reportedly high degree of compliance with cuts agreed to in December by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries and some other oil producers. Market concerns about oversupply have been reinforced, however, by unexpected increases in US crude oil inventories and the rising rig count in shale oil fields in the United States.
 
Oil prices are subject to both upside and downside risks. On the upside, the substantial reductions in investment since 2014, coupled with rising demand, may mean there is insufficient capacity to satisfy demand over the medium term. This potential upside risk is attenuated by technological advances that have continued to bring down the costs of unconventional oil production. There are also important short-term downside risks. In particular, the break-even costs of US shale oil suppliers may be lower than expected, and the production agreement between OPEC and some non-OPEC oil producers may not be renewed.
 
Some non-energy commodity prices have increased modestly since January. Lumber prices have risen in light of the Canada-US softwood lumber dispute, reflecting a slowdown in lumber shipments since new duties could be applied retroactively, as well as ongoing robust housing demand in the United States. Base metal prices are somewhat higher, driven by global supply disruptions and past production cuts. Looking ahead, the Bank of Canada's non-energy commodity price index should remain near its current level, with further upward pressure on certain components such as base metals largely offset by small declines in other categories.
 
Economic growth in Canada in recent quarters has been stronger than expected in the January Report, but the composition of aggregate demand has been uneven. In the oil and gas sector, a resumption of growth in investment spending is under way in the wake of significant adjustments to past declines in commodity prices. This contributed, together with very strong consumption and residential investment, to a temporary surge in growth in the first quarter. In contrast, non-commodity business investment and exports remain weak, raising questions about the medium-term sustainability of the upturn.
 
Over the forecast horizon, the Bank expects the economy to continue to grow, but at a more moderate pace. Economic activity will be supported by rising foreign demand, federal fiscal stimulus and accommodative monetary and financial conditions. In addition, the composition of demand growth is expected to broaden: the pace of household expenditures, especially residential investment, moderates as the contributions from exports and business investment increase, albeit at a much slower pace than would normally be expected at this stage of the cycle. Ongoing competitiveness challenges and uncertainty surrounding the prospects for global trade are expected to limit this broadening of growth. A notable increase in global protectionism remains the most important source of uncertainty facing the Canadian economy.
 
Largely reflecting temporary strength at the start of the year, real GDP is anticipated to expand by 2.6 per cent in 2017, before slowing to 1.9 per cent in 2018 and 1.8 per cent in 2019. The Bank's projection for potential output growth has been revised down. The output gap is now expected to close in the first half of 2018, somewhat sooner than projected in January.
 
Relative price movements, especially higher consumer energy prices, helped boost inflation in the first quarter of 2017, but their effect is expected to be temporary. In contrast, the Bank's preferred measures of core inflation have drifted down in recent quarters and remain below 2 per cent, consistent with material excess capacity in the Canadian economy. As in January, the Bank expects CPI inflation to remain close to 2 per cent over the projection horizon as the effects of the relative price movements dissipate and excess supply is absorbed.
 
Growth in Canadian GDP in the fourth quarter of 2016 surpassed expectations in January. Robust household spending, increased government expenditures and, to a lesser extent, modest exports supported growth. The positive surprise was concentrated in residential investment, a smaller-than-anticipated inventory drawdown and a larger pullback in imports. In contrast, final domestic demand, a key ingredient for a sustained improvement in economic activity, was weaker than projected. In particular, business investment declined, and government capital formation remained subdued, the latter consistent with reported delays in infrastructure spending.
 
The estimate for economic activity in the first quarter of 2017 has been revised up, to 3.8 per cent from the 2.5 per cent expected in the January Report. GDP growth in the quarter increased partly because of a resumption of investment growth in the oil and gas sector after a long period of steep declines. Market intelligence suggests that this pace of growth is unlikely to continue in the current price environment. Consumption growth was also very strong, partially as a result of a temporary boost from the Canada Child Benefit. As well, motor vehicle sales reached an all-time high, a pace that is well above expected annual demand. Similarly, housing activity rose sharply to a pace that is unlikely to be sustained given the economic fundamentals. Given all of these factors as well as weak non-commodity investment and exports, the Bank expects real GDP growth to moderate to 2.5 per cent in the second quarter.
 
While the degree of excess capacity has declined since the January Report, the Bank judges that in the first quarter of 2017 it remains material, between 1 1/4 and 1/4 per cent.
 
To help manage the considerable uncertainty surrounding the estimation of the output gap, the Bank places equal weight on the estimates from its two approaches (one is statistical or mechanical and the other is structural), recognizing that each approach has certain strengths and weaknesses. Consequently, the two approaches can suggest different assessments of the degree of slack in the economy. For example, in the face of persistently weak economic activity, the statistical method tends to attribute more of the weakness to lower potential output than does the structural method.
 
The labour market provides another perspective from which to assess the degree of excess capacity. Employment growth has remained firm at the national level. However, weak growth in both hours worked and wages, together with no improvement in the Bank's labour market indicator over the past year, suggests that the workforce remains underutilized. In contrast, the labour market in the United States is now close to full employment and wages are increasing at a solid pace.
 
With growth in unit labour costs subdued and the Bank's measures of core inflation below 2 per cent, it is possible that the degree of excess supply in the economy could be larger than the midpoint would suggest.
 
After reaching a low of 1.2 per cent in November 2016, CPI inflation rose to 2.0 per cent in February, largely because of higher consumer energy prices. For the first quarter of 2017, the anticipated rise in CPI inflation is now somewhat larger than expected at the time of the January Report. This surprise reflects stronger increases in prices for passenger vehicles and some services (notably hotels and intercity transportation), which were partly offset by weaker retail food prices. The impact of all these relative price movements on inflation is expected to be temporary.
 
All the Bank's measures of core inflation have drifted down in recent quarters. Consistent with persistent economic slack, these measures all remain below 2 per cent, although the range remains relatively wide - between 1.3 and 1.9 per cent.
 
Potential output growth is projected to increase gradually from a trough of 1.3 per cent in 2016-17 to 1.6 per cent by 2020. Trend labour productivity growth should improve as the lagged effects of previously weak investment dissipate, particularly in the oil and gas sector. In addition, as excess capacity in the non-resource sector is absorbed, investment there is expected to support higher trend labour productivity growth. In contrast, population aging and other demographic forces are expected to continue to weigh on trend labour input growth.
 
Relative to the previous annual assessment in April 2016, the Bank's estimates for potential output growth over the projection have been revised down. The revision is explained by slower-than-anticipated growth in trend labour productivity resulting from the pronounced weakness in business investment over 2015 and 2016. This slower growth is only partially offset by a modest upward revision to trend labour input growth, reflecting higher levels of immigration.
 
The Bank's estimate of potential output is subject to considerable uncertainty and as such the estimates are presented as a range. In particular, the procyclical rebound in potential output growth incorporated into the base-case projection could be stronger than expected.
 
Real GDP growth is projected to continue to slow beyond the first half of 2017 and become more balanced across demand categories, with larger contributions from exports as well as public and private investment and smaller contributions from residential investment and consumption.
 
From a sectoral perspective, economic growth continues to be supported by the expanding service sector. Growth in resource-related activity is resuming in the wake of significant adjustments to past declines in commodity prices, helping to support a modest expansion of the goods sector.
 
The forecast for real GDP growth in 2017 has been revised up following stronger-than-anticipated household expenditures, particularly residential investment, as well as stronger-than-expected spending activity in the oil and gas sector. The surprise in growth is concentrated in the first quarter. By the fourth quarter of 2017, the GDP growth outlook is broadly unchanged from that in January.
 
Over the projection horizon, exports are forecast to grow by a modest 2.5 per cent, led by strengthening global demand. Ongoing challenges to competitiveness and uncertainty about US trade policy, however, are projected to weigh on the export outlook. As a result, export growth is particularly muted relative to past cycles, leading to only a modest increase in the share of exports in GDP.
 
Non-commodity exports are expected to expand moderately, led by services and several manufactured goods. Over the past year, exports of services, driven by transportation services and travel services, have outperformed goods exports, and strong growth is projected to continue. Exports of manufactured goods, including aircraft and related parts, and pharmaceutical and medicinal products, are forecast to increase. In contrast, the outlook also incorporates the impact of announced changes to auto production mandates, which are expected to restrain exports in the second half of the year.
 
Commodity exports will be supported by firmer commodity prices. Nevertheless, past declines in investment in the oil and gas sector and competitiveness challenges in the mining sector will limit their contribution to overall export growth. Similarly, lumber exports are being adversely affected by uncertainty about the size of countervailing and anti-dumping import duties levied by the United States and the possibility that these duties will be applied retroactively.
 
Export growth has been revised down relative to the January Report mainly because of additional modest drag on global investment coming from uncertainty about US trade policy.
 
As with exports, business investment spending is expected to increase over the projection horizon, reflecting, in part, an end to the adjustment to the commodity price shock and a modest expansion in the non-resource sector. Nevertheless, it is projected to remain well below what would normally be expected based on previous business cycles. Overall, business investment's share of total demand in the Canadian economy is expected to remain close to its current level over the forecast horizon.
 
Responses to the spring 2017 Business Outlook Survey indicate that, after two years of weakness, plans to invest in machinery and equipment have become more widespread. However, many participating firms expect the increase in expenditures to be modest and, in some cases, limited to maintenance. This suggests that the economic upturn is not yet perceived to be sufficiently certain or sustainable to warrant major investment expenditures.
 
Canadian firms remain wary, in part, because of concerns about increased protectionism, reduced competitiveness of Canadian firms in the event of corporate tax cuts and regulatory changes in the United States, and possible delays in the implementation of other US policies. While several surveys suggest that indicators of business sentiment have improved recently, many are still below their historical averages.
 
Investment in industries outside the oil and gas sector is expected to remain subdued in 2017. In fact, capital expenditures in the manufacturing sector are expected to be weak, as shown in Statistics Canada's survey of the capital spending intentions of firms. Nevertheless, rates of capacity utilization for many of these industries are close to their historical highs. Following the projected expansion of demand, more firms will face capacity constraints, and investment is anticipated to rise.
 
After contracting for two years, investment in the oil and gas sector is projected to expand moderately, as indicated by increased rig activity and reported capital expenditure plans. This outlook is supported by the spring Business Outlook Survey, which finds that the investment intentions of firms in regions most affected by the oil price shock have improved but are still low, revealing a sense of cautious optimism. Nevertheless, prospects for the sector are highly contingent on the outlook for global oil prices and the completion of pipeline projects.
 
Investment growth has been revised down from the January Report, since the uncertainty about US trade policy is now projected to persist for longer than previously assumed.
 
Growth in consumer spending should remain solid in 2017, supported by steady gains in labour income as well as elevated housing and financial wealth. Looking ahead, consumption growth is expected to moderate broadly in line with growth in disposable income. Elevated debt will also restrain expenditures somewhat. The overall ratio of debt to disposable income is expected to edge higher.
 
Housing market activity has been very strong in some segments of the national market. In particular, resales and starts have increased significantly in the Greater Toronto Area and in parts of the Golden Horseshoe region. Price growth in the GTA has accelerated and seems to have entered a phase in which speculation is playing a larger role. Resales have also increased in Alberta, albeit from previous lows. Conversely, resales have slowed in the Greater Vancouver Area, and growth remains modest in the rest of the country.
 
The projected moderation in household spending will be led by a slower pace of growth in housing expenditures. As in the January Report, the Bank expects changes to the federal government's housing finance policy to continue to dampen housing activity. In addition, the housing market is anticipated to slow somewhat in light of elevated household debt and higher longer-term borrowing costs resulting from the projected gradual rise in global long-term yields.
 
In light of stronger-than-expected data in most markets in the first quarter of 2017, the contribution of residential investment to real GDP growth in 2017 is expected to be significantly higher than anticipated in January. This is the primary reason behind the upward revision to GDP growth in 2017.
 
CPI inflation is expected to dip to 1.7 per cent in the middle of 2017 as the upward pressure from consumer energy prices dissipates. In addition, weak food prices, electricity rebates and excess supply weigh on inflation.
 
Starting in the second half of 2017, inflation is projected to fluctuate narrowly around 2 per cent as the impact of the relative price shocks fade at differing speeds. As excess capacity is absorbed in the first half of 2018, inflation returns sustainably to the 2 per cent target.
 
Medium- and long-term inflation expectations remain well anchored. The March 2017 Consensus Economics forecast for CPI inflation is 2.1 per cent in 2017 and 2.0 per cent in 2018.
 
Based on the past dispersion of private sector forecasts, a reasonable range around - the base-case projection for CPI inflation is ±0.3 percentage points. This range is intended to convey a sense of forecast uncertainty.
 
The prospect of a notable shift toward protectionist global trade policies is the most important source of uncertainty surrounding the outlook. However, it is impossible to fully quantify the implications of this shift without more clarity about the actual measures and their timing. The range of possibilities is wide, and the channels through which the measures would affect the economy are complex. Nevertheless, the Bank has attempted to better balance the risks around the outlook by incorporating at least some of the adverse impact of the elevated uncertainty on business investment and exports into the base case.
 
Aside from this, the Bank's outlook is subject to several risks emanating from both the external environment and the domestic economy. As in past reports, the focus is on a selection of risks identified as the most important for the projected path for inflation, drawing from a larger set of risks taken into account in the projection. The evolution of the risks since the previous Report is summarized in Table 4. The risk of higher potential output has been added, while the risks of higher global long-term interest rates and higher commodity prices are not highlighted in this Report but will continue to be monitored.
 
While the base case incorporates some strengthening in US economic growth, resulting in part from anticipated fiscal stimulus, an even stronger growth path is also possible. The ongoing recovery, together with prospective policy changes, such as infrastructure spending and deregulation, could trigger "animal spirits," especially if global policy uncertainty dissipates - that is, they could boost business confidence and lead to an acceleration in the rate of investment, firm creation and innovation. Stronger US household spending and public and private investment would have positive spillovers for Canadian business confidence, investment and exports.
 
While the outlook for business investment already reflects some of the adverse impact coming from elevated US policy uncertainty, further downside risks remain. In particular, the disappointing performance of business investment since the global financial crisis could signal that demographic forces or some other structural factors are more relevant than previously estimated. In addition, the ongoing shift in the economy's production toward less-capital-intensive services could result in both a different composition and a smaller share of investment in GDP. Over time, weaker business investment would also reduce capital deepening and lower potential output, partially mitigating the disinflationary effect of weaker demand.
 
Strong motor vehicle sales, high consumer confidence, elevated single-family home construction, increased house resales and rising house prices suggest that underlying household spending growth remains robust. While the Bank expects growth in household spending to moderate in the coming quarters, strength could continue for some time if the savings rate (now at its highest level since 2001) declines by more than expected or if the current momentum in the housing market persists. While this would provide a near-term boost to economic activity, it could further exacerbate the macroeconomic and financial vulnerabilities associated with high household indebtedness and house prices.
 
Uncertainty associated with the Bank's estimate of potential output is large. The current level of potential output could be higher than estimated, resulting in more excess supply and less inflationary pressure than currently assessed.
 
Furthermore, the trajectory of potential output could be higher than anticipated, posing a downside risk to inflation. As the economy gains strength and approaches full capacity, greater investment, including through new firm creation, could generate a faster expansion of potential output than assumed in the base case. Moreover, this stronger activity could lead to reabsorption of workers, especially youth, who have left the labour force or were unemployed or underemployed for a long time. The procyclical effects of this additional firm and employment creation could provide a boost to potential output growth. The stronger these effects are, the more likely it is for potential output growth to be in the upper part of the Bank's range of estimates and for inflation to fall short of the projection.