Growth in the global economy began to slow in the fourth quarter of 2007 and the first quarter of 2008. This reflected the effects of the slowdown in the US economy and ongoing dislocations in global financial markets.
 
Growth in the Canadian economy has also moderated. Strong domestic demand has been largely offset by sharply reduced net exports. Both total and core CPI inflation were running at about 1.5 per cent at the end of the first quarter, but the underlying trend of inflation is judged to be about 2 per cent, consistent with an economy that was operating just above its production capacity.
 
The Bank is projecting a deeper and more protracted slowdown for the US economy than in the January Monetary Policy Report Update. This projection reflects a more pronounced impact on consumer spending from the contraction in the US housing market and significantly tighter credit conditions. While a housing-market correction of the size now under way in the United States would typically produce a severe slowdown in GDP growth, several factors are providing some offset. First, the recently legislated fiscal-stimulus package will support the US economy in the third and fourth quarters. Second, the depreciation of the US dollar will help spur exports. Third, substantial easing in US monetary policy should continue to boost GDP growth in 2009 and beyond, particularly as financial market dislocations are worked out.
 
The deterioration in economic and financial conditions in the United States will have significant spillover effects globally, particularly in the industrial economies. Emerging-market economies should be less affected by the financial turbulence, and their growing domestic demand should help to offset the effect of weaker exports.
 
These global developments will have consequences for the Canadian economy. First, exports are projected to decline this year, exerting a significant drag on GDP growth through the first half, before picking up gradually in the second half of 2008 and in 2009. Second, turbulence in global financial markets will continue to make financing in capital markets more costly and difficult for Canadian businesses and banks. The increased bank funding spreads are expected to be further passed on to businesses and households, creating tighter credit conditions through the rest of 2008 that then begin to dissipate in 2009. Credit conditions are assumed to return to more normal levels in 2010. The relatively strong capitalization of Canadian financial institutions should mean that credit availability will remain more robust in Canada than in other major markets. Third, business and consumer sentiment in Canada is expected to soften somewhat.
 
Slowing US domestic demand would be expected to place downward pressure on the prices of many commodities. This effect will, however, likely be offset to some extent by the combination of continued strong demand from commodity-intensive emerging-market economies and tight supply conditions in many commodity markets. Financial investors may also reinforce momentum in commodity prices at the margin. On balance, the prices of non-energy commodities are expected to ease over the projection period from their current very high levels.
 
Firm commodity prices, high employment levels, and the effect of cumulative easing in monetary policy will continue to support Canada's domestic demand, which is expected to be the key source of economic growth over the projection period.
 
Overall, the Canadian economy is projected to move into excess supply in the second quarter of this year, and spare capacity will continue to increase through early 2009. A return to growth rates above that of potential output, supported by a gradual strengthening in the US economy, accommodative monetary policy, and a return to more normal credit conditions bring the economy back into balance around mid-2010. In the Bank's base-case projection, average annual real GDP growth is projected to be 1.4 per cent in 2008, 2.4 per cent in 2009, and 3.3 per cent in 2010.
 
The recent price-level adjustments for automobiles and the effect of past changes in indirect taxes will keep measured inflation below target through 2008. The emergence of excess supply in the economy should keep downward pressure on inflation through 2009. Both core and total inflation are projected to move up to 2 per cent in 2010, as the economy moves back into balance.
 
The risks around the projection for the US and global economies, as well as for inflation in Canada, appear to be balanced. Still, there are a number of upside and downside risks around the Bank's new base-case projection for inflation in Canada.
 
On the upside, stronger domestic demand than incorporated in the base-case projection, possibly due to higher commodity prices, could lead to higher inflation in Canada, especially if the growth in potential output is lower than assumed. As well, global inflationary pressures could spill over to Canada through higher import costs.
 
On the downside, the projected weakness in the United States and other industrialized economies could put greater downward pressure on commodity prices. There are risks from the evolution of financial market dislocations and their effect on the cost and availability of credit. There could also be greater direct downward pressure on the prices of core goods related to the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar.
 
Against this backdrop, the Bank of Canada lowered its target for the overnight rate by 50 basis points on both 4 March and 22 April, bringing it to 3 per cent. In line with the new outlook, some further monetary stimulus will likely be required to achieve the inflation target over the medium term. Given the cumulative reduction of 150 basis points in the target for the overnight rate since December, the timing of any further monetary stimulus will depend on the evolution of the global economy and domestic demand, and their impact on inflation in Canada.
 
After several years of strong growth, the pace of the global economic expansion slowed in the fourth quarter of 2007 and the first quarter of 2008, particularly in the industrialized economies. This slowdown in global economic growth reflects the weakening in the US economy and the dislocations in global financial markets stemming from problems in the US subprime-mortgage market.
 
Available information suggests that US economic growth stalled in the first quarter of 2008. Broad-based declines in residential investment and house prices, coupled with tighter credit conditions and waning consumer confidence in the face of high gasoline prices and a softening labour market, contributed to the marked slowdown in consumer spending. While strong growth in net exports has provided some offset, business investment has suffered from limited access to credit and weakening consumer demand.
 
Economic growth in Europe and Japan is slowing. Exports from these countries are being affected by the weaker growth in the United States and the effects of a sharp appreciation of the euro and the yen. In Europe, credit conditions have continued to tighten, restraining consumer and business spending.
 
In newly industrialized and emerging-market economies, particularly China, GDP growth in recent quarters was stronger than expected. These countries have been less affected by the recent financial turmoil, and their growing domestic demand has so far largely offset the impact of weaker exports to the United States and Europe.
 
Commodity prices have risen since the January Update, largely as a result of continued strong demand from the emerging economies and constraints on supply. The prices of non-energy commodities have moved up from already-high levels, with large gains in the prices of grains and oilseeds in response to rising demand for food in emerging economies, increased demand for biofuels, and poor crop yields. Some of the increases in the prices of metals have been linked to temporary supply disruptions in China and South Africa.
 
Energy prices have continued to rise sharply in 2008. The price of light crude oil (West Texas Intermediate), which was about US$90 per barrel at the time of the January Update, increased to average US$112 in the ten days ending on 18 April 2008, reflecting the combination of continued vigorous global demand and some weakness in non-OPEC supplies. The rise in natural gas prices was partly associated with increased demand stemming from an unusually cold winter in North America.
 
Economic growth in Canada slowed sharply in the fourth quarter of 2007, following strong expansion through the first three quarters of the year. The drag coming from net exports intensified over the year, more than offsetting the continuing strength in final domestic demand. Real GDP increased by 0.8 per cent in the fourth quarter, below the 1.5 per cent growth projected in the January Update. Available data for the first quarter of 2008 suggest that real GDP growth was about 1.0 per cent, with reductions in inventory investment and net exports offsetting most of the growth in domestic demand.
 
The dampening effect coming from net exports was very pronounced in the second half of 2007. The US economic slowdown and the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar led to a reduction in Canadian export volumes, especially machinery and equipment and consumer goods. At the same time, imports rose very strongly, the result of both robust growth in domestic demand and the past rise in the dollar.
 
Final domestic demand made even stronger gains in the second half of 2007 than in the first half. Support for domestic demand came from a continued rise in the terms of trade, reflected in an above-average increase in real incomes of nearly 5 per cent between the fourth quarter of 2006 and the fourth quarter of 2007. A continued rise in household net worth (boosted by rising house prices) contributed to substantial increases in household borrowing and spending. Spending by businesses on machinery and equipment also picked up markedly, owing to continued strong profitability, solid balance sheets, and considerable decreases in the prices of imported machinery and equipment. The tightening of credit conditions in Canada stemming from developments in global financial markets since last August does not appear to have significantly affected either household spending or business investment in the second half of 2007.
 
Labour productivity in the business sector declined by 0.1 per cent from the fourth quarter of 2006 to the fourth quarter of 2007. Despite the slower growth of real GDP during the fourth quarter, total hours worked increased at an unusually strong pace. This puzzling development may reflect factors such as the high adjustment costs associated with reducing employment levels in the manufacturing sector and increased precautionary demand for labour in sectors facing labour shortages. The impact of high labour utilization on aggregate productivity growth was further amplified by a shift in the share of total hours worked towards low-productivity industries.
 
The Bank's conventional measure of production capacity indicates that growth in potential output averaged 2.6 per cent in 2007, about the same as previously estimated. Strong growth in trend labour supply, which has been about 1.7 per cent, offset the effects of weaker trend productivity growth, which is estimated to have added just under 1.0 per cent to potential output growth.
 
Pressures on production capacity have eased since the third quarter of 2007. In the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey, the percentage of firms reporting that they would have difficulty in meeting an unanticipated increase in demand has fallen sharply from recent highs to the average level for the survey. In addition, the Bank's conventional measure of the output gap indicates that the economy was operating about 0.4 per cent above its production potential in the first quarter of 2008, down from just over 1 per cent in the third quarter of last year. Statistics Canada's indicator of capacity utilization suggests that pressures on production capacity in the non-farm, goods-producing sector were well below average in the fourth quarter of 2007.
 
The slowdown in the Canadian economy is not yet evident in most labour market and wage indicators. The employment-to-population ratio was at a record high in both February and March, while the unemployment rate in March was just above a 33-year low. As well, the 12-month change in the average hourly earnings of permanent workers reported by Statistics Canada in the Labour Force Survey (considered a good indicator of the underlying change in wages) picked up markedly after mid-2007.
 
However, data on hourly labour compensation from the Productivity Accounts and the percentage of firms reporting labour shortages in the Bank's spring survey do indicate some easing in labour market pressures.
 
After reviewing the indicators of capacity pressures, the Governing Council judges that, overall, the economy was operating just above its production capacity in the first quarter of 2008, and it is expected to move into modest excess supply in the second quarter.
 
Concerns about rising global inflation have become more evident in recent months, reflecting the impact of higher commodity prices, especially food and energy prices, combined with increased pressures on production capacity in several countries after a period of strong global growth. In Canada, these pressures have been muted to a significant extent by price-level adjustments associated with the high value of the Canadian dollar.
 
Total CPI inflation averaged 1.8 per cent in the first quarter of 2008, down from 2.4 per cent in the last quarter of 2007. If the effect of changes in indirect taxes is excluded, the rate of increase in the total CPI in the first quarter was 2.4 per cent, unchanged from the preceding quarter.
 
After averaging just above 2 per cent in the period between September 2006 and August 2007, the core rate of inflation has moved down and averaged 1.4 per cent in February and March 2008. A significant part of this reduction appears to reflect greater competitive pressures following the rise of the Canadian dollar to near parity with the US dollar, which led to a downward level adjustment in the prices of some goods, particularly automobiles. Additionally, the rate of change in core food prices has eased markedly, owing to such factors as increased competition in the retail food sector. At the same time, the 12-month rate of increase in the prices of core services has remained quite high, owing to the continued strength in domestic demand.
 
Other measures of the trend rate of inflation that the Bank monitors, when adjusted to exclude the effect of changes in indirect taxes, were somewhat higher than the core inflation rate in the first quarter of 2008. Given that the recent weakening in core inflation appears to be largely the result of one-time price-level adjustments and after considering alternative measures as well, the Governing Council judges that the underlying trend in inflation was about 2 per cent in the first quarter.
 
The four-quarter change in the chain price index for GDP (a broad price measure of the goods and services produced in Canada) edged up from 3.4 per cent in the second quarter of 2007 to 3.9 per cent in the fourth quarter, reflecting greater improvements in Canada's terms of trade.
 
Key measures of inflation expectations continue to be well anchored at 2 per cent. The mean private sector forecast for total CPI inflation in 2009 is 2 per cent, and about 80 per cent of firms in the Bank's spring Business Outlook Survey expected CPI inflation to be within a range of 1 to 3 per cent over the next two years. Consensus forecasts of inflation over the longer term also remained very close to 2 per cent.
 
Strains in the global financial system have broadened and become more severe in recent months. Estimates of losses from exposure to US mortgage and structured credits have increased, and problems in these markets have spread to other credit markets. Yield spreads between corporate and government bonds have widened significantly and debt issuance in several key fixed income markets has been constrained. These difficulties have been heightened by a lack of liquidity, a widespread process of deleveraging by financial institutions, and the deteriorating outlook for the US economy.
 
Widespread uncertainty about the distribution of credit losses among financial institutions has continued to feed concerns over counterparty risk and has contributed to higher borrowing spreads in term money markets. In March, amid renewed signs of pressure in term money markets, central banks again intervened in a coordinated effort to support the financial system through the introduction of a number of additional measures to address the liquidity needs of financial institutions. Steps taken recently by several large international banks to improve disclosure of potential losses and to strengthen their balance sheets have also led to some lessening of uncertainty about counterparty risk.
 
The US Federal Reserve has lowered its target for the federal funds rate by 300 basis points since September 2007 in response to the slowing in the US economy and the increased cost and reduced availability of credit to businesses and households. Short-term rates in the United States embody expectations of a further reduction in the federal funds rate over the course of the year. The Bank of England has also lowered its policy interest rate. In contrast, the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan have not changed their respective policy rates since the beginning of the financial turmoil.
 
Policy rates in Canada have been lowered by 150 basis points since December. Market expectations are for a further 25-basis point reduction in the overnight rate by the end of the year.
 
The turmoil in global financial markets has led to tighter credit conditions in Canada, but strains in Canadian credit markets have been somewhat less intense than those in the United States. Canadian financial institutions, businesses, and households have healthier balance sheets. Canadian banks are less exposed to the subprime-mortgage market than their US counterparts. Furthermore, Canadian banks are less dependent on securitization for their financing and on capital markets for their revenues. Thus far, their losses have been limited, and their exposure to structured products backed by subprime mortgages quite manageable.
 
Nonetheless, from the beginning of the financial market turbulence last summer until 21 April, the average spreads for the different types of market financing for banks increased by about 75 basis points relative to the overnight rate. The tightening in credit conditions is most evident in the spreads paid by banks to issue bonds and senior deposit notes. Banks have shown a willingness to borrow at these higher spreads in order to secure longer-term financing, but have not yet fully passed these increased spreads on to businesses and households. Nevertheless, the absolute cost of borrowing by banks has declined, given that the overnight rate was reduced by 100 basis points over the period.
 
The spread between the cost of borrowing for non-financial businesses and the overnight rate as of 21 April has risen by about 50 basis points since the middle of 2007. This widening has been more than offset by reductions in the overnight rate. Nevertheless, the terms and conditions of credit have tightened, and access to bank financing for new clients has been reduced. Debt issuance by non-financial corporations remains difficult, and new debt issues are generally being priced at rates higher than indicative rates in secondary markets. On the whole, the growth of business credit has remained elevated in the first quarter of 2008. This partly reflects a substitution away from market financing towards bank financing in the current turbulent environment.
 
The spread between the costs of borrowing by households and the overnight rate has also remained elevated and, as of 21 April, is estimated to be around 50 basis points higher than it was last summer. But the terms and conditions of household credit have not tightened to any extent, and the cost of borrowing is lower, given the declines in the overnight interest rate. Growth in household borrowing remains strong despite some deceleration thus far in 2008. Continued vigorous demand for credit by households is associated with robust growth in employment, sustained wage increases, increases in home equity, and decreases in the effective cost of borrowing.
 
Since the January Update, the Canadian dollar has averaged 100 cents US but more recently has been trading in a range of roughly 97 to 100 cents US. High prices for energy and metals continue to support the currency. While the actual policy interest rate spread between Canada and the United States has widened since January, the spread expected by the third quarter of 2008 has narrowed, leading to some modest downward pressure on the currency. The trade-weighted CERI-ex US has declined by about 4.2 per cent since the Update, reflecting the strength of both the euro and the Japanese yen, as well as concern about the negative effects of the US economic slowdown on the Canadian economy.
 
The outlook for the Canadian economy through to the end of 2010 has been revised down from that in the January Update to reflect the effects of the weaker US and global economies, and the tightening of credit conditions resulting from continuing strains in financial markets. The base-case projection incorporates a number of key assumptions. First, the Canada/US exchange rate is assumed to average 98 cents US, within the recent trading range. Second, energy prices evolve in line with current futures prices. Third, the tighter global credit conditions are assumed to persist until 2009. Fourth, potential output growth is assumed to be 2.8 per cent in 2008, 2.7 per cent in 2009, and 2.6 per cent in 2010. Finally, the base case is predicated upon a gradual and orderly resolution of global imbalances.
 
Global economic growth is expected to slow considerably in 2008 and 2009 as a result of a deepening of the US economic slowdown and its spillover to other economies, particularly those of the other major industrialized countries. In 2010, the global economy is projected to grow more strongly, as the turbulence in credit markets subsides, housing markets in the United States and Europe stabilize, and economies begin to rebuild domestic demand and reduce excess supply.
 
The Bank now expects US GDP to decline marginally in the first half of 2008 before growth picks up gradually through 2009. Domestic demand in the United States is projected to remain subdued over the coming year as a result of declines in employment, sharp increases in gasoline prices, weaker consumer confidence, further weakening in the housing sector and tightening in credit conditions. The fall in housing activity and house prices is projected to continue until the second half of 2009. Increased borrowing spreads, reductions in the availability of credit, and tighter terms and conditions are assumed to persist through 2008 and gradually dissipate through 2009. In 2010, as the housing market stabilizes, heightened risk aversion dissipates, and financial institutions improve their capital positions, credit conditions are assumed to be back to more normal levels.
 
Several factors are helping to mitigate the weakness in the US economy in 2008, and will contribute to the recovery through 2009 and 2010. First, monetary policy has eased considerably in recent months, which will provide some support for domestic demand. Second, the cumulative effect of the depreciation of the real effective US exchange rate, coupled with solid economic growth in the rest of the world, will help to underpin export growth. Third, easing in credit conditions and the gradual elimination of excess housing supply will support a resumption of economic growth in the latter part of the projection period. The US government's fiscal stimulus package is expected to temporarily boost economic growth in mid-2008.
 
Owing to the weaker profile for US GDP growth and tighter credit conditions, projected rates of GDP growth in Europe and Japan have been reduced for 2008 and 2009, but are expected to move slightly above potential rates in 2010.
 
Growth in China and in the newly industrialized Asian economies is projected to remain strong but to moderate over the projection horizon, as demand from the United States and other industrialized countries weakens, and tighter monetary policies are introduced to curb mounting inflationary pressures.
 
Prices for non-energy commodities are higher in the near term than projected in the last Update, but are expected to ease by about 15 per cent between now and the end of 2010. Supplies of these commodities should gradually adjust as new production capacity comes online and reductions arising from weather-related factors unwind. In addition, global demand for commodities should ease as a result of the slowing in world economic growth.
 
Futures prices for crude oil are also higher than those in the January Update. Based on futures prices as of the 10 days ending 18 April, prices for crude oil should ease by about 10 per cent from their current level of just over US$112 per barrel to around US$102 per barrel in 2010. Futures prices for natural gas are also somewhat higher than in the January Update.
 
The outlook for the Canadian economy has been directly affected by the downward revision to the economic outlook in the United States and by the continuing strains in credit markets as institutions deleverage and risk is repriced. While credit conditions for households and firms have tightened, lending rates do not yet fully reflect the higher funding spreads for banks. It is assumed that these higher spreads will be passed on and that tighter credit conditions will persist through 2008. Credit spreads are then assumed to narrow gradually over the course of 2009 and to stabilize in 2010 at 25 basis points higher than their levels prior to the turmoil.
 
The Bank's base-case projection for Canada is now weaker for both 2008 and 2009 than that in the January Update. On an average annual basis, the economy is projected to expand by 1.4 per cent in 2008, 2.4 per cent in 2009, and 3.3 per cent in 2010.
 
The slowdown in Canadian activity in 2008 results mainly from further declines in exports in the first half of the year, owing to weak US demand and the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar. Although growth in exports is expected to resume in the second half of this year, solid advances are not expected before 2010, given the gradual recovery of demand in the United States.
 
With growth in imports expected to remain strong, net exports exert a larger drag on overall growth in 2008 than was the case in the last Update.
 
Growth in final domestic demand is expected to provide important support to economic expansion. The growth of consumer spending should remain strong in the first half of 2008, before easing a little over the remainder of the projection period. These solid gains are supported by continued growth in real disposable income and household net worth, as well as the stimulus provided by monetary policy, although reduced US growth will dampen consumption growth in Canada slightly through its effects on real income, net worth, and confidence. Housing investment is projected to decline slightly over the projection period from the very high level reached last year. The tightening of credit conditions in Canada is also expected to have a slight moderating effect on the growth of household spending, which should largely dissipate by 2010.
 
The growth of business investment should ease during the projection period from the strong pace registered in 2007, owing to the effects of slowing global economic growth, the tightening of credit conditions, and increased uncertainty resulting from the financial market turbulence. Overall, gains in capital spending will, nevertheless, stay quite robust, given the projects that have already started, the still high levels of commodity prices, strong profits and solid balance sheets, and ongoing reductions in the prices of imported machinery and equipment.
 
The real growth of government spending on goods and services is projected to decelerate and to average just over 3 per cent through 2010.
 
Weaker near-term growth causes the Canadian economy to move into a position of excess supply in the second quarter of 2008, and spare production capacity continues to increase through early 2009. In this base-case projection, accommodative monetary policy, including some further monetary stimulus in 2008, a gradual recovery in the US economy, and the eventual return to more normal credit conditions globally and in Canada, all help to bring aggregate demand back into balance with aggregate supply around mid-2010.
 
Owing largely to the recent price-level adjustments for automobiles, the core rate of inflation is projected to remain at about 1.3 per cent through the third quarter of 2008. With the effect of the price-level adjustments falling out of the year-over-year calculation in the fourth quarter of 2008, the core rate moves up to about 1.7 per cent. Excess supply in the economy acts to keep the core rate below 2 per cent through 2009. As the amount of excess supply diminishes, and with the continuing upward pressure from higher labour and energy costs, core inflation subsequently rises to 2 per cent in 2010, a little later than in the last Update.
 
The outlook for the 12-month rate of increase in the total CPI reflects the revised projection for core inflation, assumptions for energy prices based on current futures prices, and the impact of past changes in indirect taxes. Total CPI inflation in 2008 is projected to be higher than in the last Update, owing to the effect of higher futures prices for crude oil. Excluding the impact of the recent changes in indirect taxes, total CPI inflation is projected to average just under 2.5 per cent through the remainder of 2008 and then move slightly below 2 per cent in early 2009, before returning to the target in 2010.
 
There are a number of risks around the Bank's base-case projection for inflation in Canada. The risks around the US and global economic projections are considered to be balanced.
 
On the upside, stronger domestic demand than assumed in the base-case projection, driven by solid wage gains in a tight labour market and continued improvements in the terms of trade, could lead to higher inflation. Given the persistent weakness in Canada's labour productivity growth, potential output growth could also be lower than assumed and could intensify the upward pressure on inflation. Furthermore, if demand for commodities from emerging markets remains robust and the ability of producers to increase global supplies is constrained, upward pressure on many commodity prices may intensify.
 
Global inflationary pressures also pose an upside risk. They could spill over to Canada and lead to higher-than-projected inflation through increased costs for imports. On the downside, weakness in the United States and other industrialized countries may result in greater downward pressure on commodity prices than assumed in the base case. This would have the effect of slowing the rate of increase in real incomes and domestic demand in Canada, putting downward pressure on inflation.
 
There is also the risk that market funding for Canadian banks and firms could be more difficult than assumed, which could further increase the cost and restrict the availability of credit for business investment and consumption.
 
As well, there is the risk of greater direct downward pressure on core goods prices related to the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar. The increased competitive pressures, which have been seen most importantly in the prices of automobiles, could spread to other sectors.
 
Overall, the risks to the base-case projection for inflation appear balanced.